#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  Temporal Imaginaries in Accounts of Parenting Practices: Negotiations of Time, Advice, and Expertise 

Tineke Broer

Department of Law, Technology, Markets, and Society; Tilburg Law School;
Tilburg University

T.Broer_1@uvt.nl

Martyn Pickersgill

Centre for Biomedicine, Self and Society; Usher Institute; University of
Edinburgh

martyn.pickersgill@ed.ac.uk

Sarah Cunningham-Burley

Centre for Biomedicine, Self and Society; Usher Institute; University of
Edinburgh

sarah.c.burley@ed.ac.uk

### Abstract

In recent decades, good mothering/parenting has been related to
responsibilities for children's brain development, as a means of
achieving desirable futures. Yet the ways in which parents engage with
neuroscience, and how they value recommendations based on it vis-Ã -vis
other forms of expertise, is not often examined. This paper focuses on
these issues, but refuses to reify neuroscientific advice. We are
orientated by the accounts of twenty-two caregivers (predominantly,
mothers) in Scotland whom we interviewed about the neuroscientific ideas
about parenting that they encountered and negotiated through voluntary
parenting programs. Our participants discussed broader advice they
received (e.g., through books, friends, families), rather than just that
associated with neuroscience. In examining parents' negotiations of
wide-ranging advice, we demonstrate how particular configurations of the
past and the future were constructed through the interviews.
Accordingly, we analyze how these temporal imaginaries help to justify
accounts of parenting practices. Constructions of possible (gendered and
classed) futures and pasts contoured our participants' engagements with
advice and expertise. Consequently, we demonstrate that temporal
imaginaries can play an important role in how mothers (and other
caregivers) reflexively develop and situate their own epistemologies of
parenting.

### Keywords 

Neuroscience, parenting, STS, temporalities, expertise

### Introduction

Brilliant teaching people about child development. It's brilliant. It's
great. It's advanced so much and stuff like that. But it's...you cannae
\[cannot\]...twenty-first century, you cannae go through it without,
like, raising your voice a bit and stuff like that, because your
child...you dinnae \[do not\] want your child to end up like that
\[i.e., examples of illegal practices already discussed in the
interview\]. ... Do you know what I mean, we'll have really good babies
and that, but when they're adults, what are they going to be like then?

This is an excerpt from our interview with Thea and her friend
Charlie,^1^ both of whom were mothers of young children in Scotland. The
quote encapsulates much of our interest in this paper. Thea and Charlie
talked about how their parents and they themselves were raised,
including their experiences of chastisement. They reflected critically
on how a state-mandated and often neuroscientifically orientated focus
on child development, and specifically advice not to raise your voice
when children misbehave, does not "prepar\[e\] children for the world to
come." Thea's words illustrate how temporalities shape the reception and
negotiation of parenting advice, with the past used as a resource in the
present to enable potential futures. Based on twenty-two interviews with
young parents, sometimes accompanied by a friend or a family member,
this paper analyzes how "brain-based" (Hughes and Baylin 2012) and other
kinds of advice are adopted, adapted, and sometimes rejected by parents.
In particular, and building on key literatures from feminist science and
technology studies (STS) and sociology, we show how temporal imaginaries
play a role in how parents negotiated advice.

### Background

The relationship between parents and experts of myriad kinds has been a
fruitful sociological topic for decades, with the dynamics between
private and public spheres---and between the family and the state---of
particular interest (Rose and Miller 1992). Indeed, state-sanctioned or
-originating expert intervention within family life is one key activity
of governance across many nations ( Rose 1998; Lee, Macvarish, and
Bristow 2010; Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2015; Lowe, Lee, and Macvarish
2015b; Zhang and McGhee 2019). In this regard, psychological concepts
and ideas, such as theories of "attachment" (Bowlby 1969), can be used
to govern families at a distance as well as more closely and directly (
Rose and Miller 1992; Duschinsky, Greco, and Solomon 2015). The idea of
attachment, and interrelatedly the proclaimed future importance of a
healthy attachment, helps to orient parents towards a time beyond the
present in respect to how they parent their children in the here and
now. The future also plays a role in professional and wider public
discourses of "good mothering," with motherhood (or parenthood more
generally) configured as a moral project through which women especially
are encouraged to see themselves as having special and principal
responsibilities for their children's futures (Lee 2008; Song et al.
2012; Lowe 2016; Leaver 2017; Kromidas 2021).

In recent decades, good parenting---and good mothering especially---has
been related to responsibilities for children's brain development, as a
means of achieving desirable futures ( Wall 2010; Thornton 2011).
Concepts and findings from the neurosciences have been given particular
prominence in policy discourses and interventions upon parenting
practices ( Lee, Macvarish, and Bristow 2010; Featherstone, Morris, and
White 2013; Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2014, 2015; Edwards, Gillies, and
Horsley 2015; Lowe, Lee, and Macvarish 2015a, 2015b; Broer and
Pickersgill 2015). For instance, Glenda Wall (2010) has shown how the
mandates of discourses of "intensive motherhood" (Hays 1998; Faircloth
2014), coupled with neuroscientific ideas, made the mothers she
interviewed generally anxious, guilty, and exhausted---always worrying
about the amount of "quality" time they could or should spend with their
children (see also Budds et al. 2017).

In the UK, parents can be offered a place within facilitated programs
where child development is discussed (Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2015;
Broer, Pickersgill, and Cunningham-Burley 2020). In these programs,
parents receive advice on how best to raise their children, and they can
discuss this advice with facilitators and fellow parents. A significant
part of the advice they receive relates to theories of attachment and/or
neuroscientific findings and propositions about children's cognitive and
emotional development (Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2015). A growing
sociological literature has examined the emergence and form of the
policies that leverage neuroscientific expertise to legitimate, sustain,
and propel parenting programs (Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2014, 2015;
Lowe, Lee, and Macvarish 2015a). The accounts of people participating in
these programs, however, have received far less attention (Broer,
Pickersgill, and Cunningham-Burley 2020).

In this paper, we draw on interviews with twenty-two parents/carers of
young children who attended one of two parenting programs in the 2010s
(described more fully below). We examine how parents discursively
negotiated the expert knowledge instantiated within the overt and
implied recommendations they received, from within and beyond the
program they attended. While the starting point for the interviews was
to discover how parents framed the utility---or not---of neuroscientific
knowledge and ideas for parents, our interviewees described far more
diverse forms of recommendations than purportedly science-based
enjoinders alone. As such, we do not limit our analysis to how parents
engaged with neuroscientific recommendations, since this would risk
reifying their importance. Instead, we are led by our participants
themselves: our focus is consequently on how parents negotiate
recommendations of varying kinds through particular temporal
imaginaries. By "recommendations," we mean not only expert guidance but
also family suggestions and wider parenting norms that enjoin particular
kinds of practices. By "temporal imaginaries" (see Svendsen et al. 2018)
we refer to constructions of the past, present, and future that are
deployed by our interviewees to justify their parenting practices at
different time points.

### Parenting, Expertise, and the Making of the Future 

Feminist sociology and technoscience studies scholars have demonstrated
how value laden ideas about good parenting are, as well as the ways
through which parents, and mothers in particular, engage with such
values. Articles often discuss constructions of "intensive motherhood,"
where mothers especially are seen as responsible for ensuring their
children grow up well fed, healthy, and happy. Research from
sociologists concerned with what, and how, children are fed provides a
key example. Heteronormative assumptions underlie food practices, as in
wider parenting ideologies and activities (Glabau 2019). A narrative of
"breast is best," for instance, is part of public discourse in a range
of nations and seeks to enjoin the breastfeeding of infants. Researchers
have demonstrated, though, that despite strong moral connotations, this
imperative can be deeply contested (Wall 2001; Knaak 2010; Ryan,
Bissell, and Alexander 2010). In relation to older children, parents
have also been shown to navigate sometimes conflicting ideas about what
and how much children (should) eat, and accounts of parents' engagements
with these debates and recommendations have been widely explored (Bell,
McNaughton, and Salmon 2009; Keenan and Stapleton 2010; O'Key and
Hugh-Jones 2010; Lupton 2011). Gendered labor is also apparent in
relation to food allergies, for example, and the work of keeping the
household "pure" (Glabau 2019).

Constructions of the future are commonly inscribed in ideas about
parenting, relating to, for instance, the health and well-being of
children as they become adolescents, adults, and perhaps parents
themselves. The future is taken into account within sociological
articles on intensive parenthood, where it is presented by participants
as a looming figure always implicated in present actions---making for
particularly anxious parents (Wall 2010). A subset of sociological
scholarship on parenting takes even more explicit account of temporality
within parenting ideas and practices. Particularly noteworthy for our
purposes is Abigail Knight et al.'s (2014) article on temporalities in
family food practices, including intergenerational alignments and
differences in what children should eat. The authors show how childhood
food memories influence the way parents raise their children, as well as
how such memories are recast in light of current parenting practices.
The work of Mary Jane Kehily and Rachel Thomson (2011) is another case
in point. By following two pregnant women through to the birth and the
early years of their children, the authors analyze the temporal and
intergenerational processes at play in how parenting identities and
practices are formed.

In this paper, we take cues from sociological and wider work on
mothering and parenting practices that deals implicitly or explicitly
with temporality; yet we follow a slightly different analytic path via
our engagement with STS. As one focal point, we draw on the sociology of
scientific and technological expectations. Research in what is usually
abbreviated as "the sociology of expectations" (Brown and Michael 2003)
is concerned with how framings of the future---and sometimes the past
(Morrison 2012)---are reconfigured through current practices, and how
constructions of possible futures serve to justify present decisions or
enjoin particular near-term actions. In this respect, sociologists have
argued that "analyzing the dynamics of expectations is a key element in
understanding scientific and technological change" (Borup et al. 2006,
286). Expectations, then, orient present discursive and material
practices towards (assumptions about) particular futures; in the
process, they sometimes enjoin the re-accounting of past experiences to
help justify or bring about these future orientations (Arribas-Ayllon,
Bartlett, and Featherstone 2010; Brosnan 2011).

In addition to work self-described as the sociology of expectations, we
take cues from related scholarship on science which considers the future
in parenting reflections and practices. Most notably, we are inspired by
Louise Whiteley et al.'s (2017) study involving interviews with parents
of children diagnosed with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). The
parent respondents were asked about their perspectives on both brain
scans and genetic tests in relation to OCD. In the analysis, the authors
illustrate the "time-travelling talk" of their respondents, where "the
past influences our evaluation of the present and attitude to the
future; the developing present affects our remembrance of the past"
(Whiteley et al. 2017, 475). Specifically, Whiteley and colleagues'
respondents reflected on futures "they might have wanted in the past"
(479), and where different ways of understanding OCD (e.g., as a brain
disorder) co-constitute the futures parents see available for their
children and for themselves. Whiteley et al.'s research also clearly
outlines some of the temporal negotiations that parents engage in when
assessing expert knowledge. These include how scientific knowledge is
assessed in relation to other forms of knowledge, be it clinical or
experiential. Moreover, knowledge was crucially adjudicated by Whiteley
and colleagues' participants to fit their circumstances and hopes at
that moment: "whether a particular form of knowledge was admitted into
the journey...can depend on whether its positive or negative affordances
were a better match to the concrete circumstances of the journey" of
parents and their children diagnosed with OCD, and wider family
circumstances (489).

Along similar lines, Maria Kromidas (2021) has analyzed how her parent
respondents in the United States enjoined, and configured, their own
childhood memories in how they negotiated scientific and cultural norms
relating to raising their children. For instance, some mothers reacted
to North American norms of middle-class parenting (e.g., full, hectic
children's schedules containing club meetings and extracurricular
lessons and activities) by drawing on a configuration of their own
stress-free childhood. This idealized image then enabled them to argue
that such middle-class parenting norms do not make their children happy.
As such, imagined pasts play a role in how parents treated their
children in the present and how they imagined their futures.

In light of this scholarship, we draw on and further develop the concept
of temporal imaginaries. Situated within the sociology of expectations,
the sociology of the future, and the sociology of time, Mette Svendsen
et al. define temporal imaginaries as "the temporal horizon that our
interlocutors step into and that become decisive for how personhood
should be stimulated or eroded in the ambiguous zone between life and
death" (2018, 23). The work of Svendsen and colleagues focuses on care
practices in a neonatal intensive care unit, a laboratory using pigs for
research purposes, and a dementia ward. In all three settings, the
authors examine the ways in which temporalities play a role in how
newborns, piglets, and people with dementia are spoken about and cared
for (see also Svendsen 2015). In the work of Svendsen et al. (2018),
then, temporal imaginaries are intimately connected to the notion of
care, both in research and healthcare contexts. Building on their
definition and analysis, as well as the sociology of expectations
referred to above, in our paper we see temporal imaginaries as
sociotechnical, discursive constructions of the past and the future that
drive and justify action in the present.

We take insights from the literatures summarized above as part of our
efforts in this paper to layer further empirical specificity around
parents' engagements with the recommendations of different types of
experts, including the experiential expertise of their own parents. As
we will demonstrate, the futures inscribed in recommendations were
salient in shaping how parents responded to advice (e.g., whether they
were receptive to it and framed it as actionable, or were more critical
of it). Our focus is, consequently, on how parents see, first, the
recommendations that they deem as (un)likely to help their children, and
second, the world as it was, as it is, and what it might be---and how
these all constructions articulate with and substantiate each other.

### Methods

This research formed part of a larger project that sought to better
understand the social dimensions of neuroscience, and in particular its
role in shaping policies about, services for, and personal experiences
of family life. Part of the research involved semi-structured interviews
with twenty-two mothers and other parents/carers of young children.
These interviews covered experiences of raising children,
recommendations and parenting ideas encountered, and the place of the
parenting programs (see below) in participants' experiences of and
thinking about raising children.^2^

Respondents were recruited through one of two parent programs in which
they had participated (Broer, Pickersgill, and Cunningham-Burley
2020).^3^ The programs had the overall aim of supporting parents in
raising healthy, happy children. One was delivered through primary
schools and through general parenting support centers; the other was
only delivered through a UK children's charity and took place in general
parent or community support centers. In their content, both programs
explicitly mentioned ideas from neuroscience and theories of attachment.
Across the two programs, facilitators would talk about the importance of
attachment and how to forge bonds with children in ways that "build
healthy brains."^4^

The target groups of the programs were broad in relation to the age and
socioeconomic status of participants. We aimed to reflect this in our
interview sample. Moreover, we asked all participants if they knew of
someone who might wish to participate in the interview with them.
Depending on their situations and preferences, interviews with program
attendees sometimes included the partner of the program attendee, their
own mother or grandmother, a friend of the family, or a support worker.
In all cases, friends and support workers were other women, and partners
were men. Ten of the interviews included at least two participants;
twelve were conducted solely with a program attendee. Three of the
attendee participants were fathers; additionally, in three other
interviews the father was present as a second respondent. One interview
was conducted with a carer, who was the grandfather of the child for
whom he had custody. Our initial aim had been to recruit a more mixed
sample in terms of gender; however, most of the people participating in
the parenting programs and responding to our interview invitation were
mothers.

Our sample was purposefully broad with respect to the economic
circumstances in which participants raised their children. As ideas
encapsulated in "intensive motherhood" generally, and neuroscientific
knowledge on parenting more specifically, have often been linked to
so-called middle-class values (Macvarish, Lee, and Lowe 2014), we deemed
it crucial to interview respondents living in less advantaged
circumstances and through more precarious situations. While our
participants' accounts are, of course, gendered and classed, we are also
reluctant to reify social class as a determining factor to account for
the rich and varied experiences our respondents shared with us.
Accordingly, we focus on how parents themselves spoke of their parenting
practices and circumstances, rather than infer any causal links between
any of these practices and circumstances with social class or position.

A first very detailed coding of the interviews was undertaken to ensure
we would stay close to the data during analysis. In this phase of
coding, we paid particular attention to how neuroscientific and other
advice was discussed in relation to parenting practices. Within those
limits, we looked for anything that appeared empirically or conceptually
noteworthy, rather than having a predetermined idea of what we wanted to
analyze. Following this initial coding phase, we grouped these codes, in
order to explore the overall theme of "negotiating expertise."
Reflecting the wide-ranging nature of our data set, examples of the
grouped codes include understanding one's child through expert
knowledge, the past of the parent and the future of the child, the
importance of love, the future, normality, exchanging expertise, the
emotive nature of expert knowledge, and the changeability of
recommendations. Upon further consideration of the data, temporalities
involved in how parents negotiated expertise emerged as important; for
example, in the codes "the past of the parent and the future of the
child," "the future," and, to some extent, "the changeability of
recommendations." We saw how such temporal concerns and constructions
played a role in how parents negotiated different advice, and we
consequently elected to focus on temporality as an overarching concept
for further analysis.

As noted, while we were particularly interested in the place of such
neuroscientific advice vis-Ã -vis other advice parents receive/seek out,
this paper goes beyond a consideration of neuroscience alone in our
analysis of how pasts and futures are talked about and constructed.
While our starting point for the interviews was indeed to discuss
neuroscientific advice in particular, the interviews meandered through
different kinds of formal and implicit enjoinments in an empirically
rich and conceptually generative way. Hence, this article does not focus
only, or even centrally, on neuroscientific advice. Rather, our concern
is with temporal imaginaries and how these interact with negotiations of
different kinds of advice more generally. As such, this focus on
temporality complements a prior analysis which focused specifically on
how interviewees articulated (or not) care practices and subjectivities
through a neuroscientific idiom (Broer, Pickersgill, and
Cunningham-Burley 2020).

In what follows, we examine how parents negotiated the recommendations
they had received and the parenting ideas they had encountered, from
within and beyond the parenting programs they attended. We show how
parents creatively accepted, rejected, and modified recommendations in
their accounts of what it meant to be good parents within the contexts
in which they lived. More specifically, we interrogate how their
negotiations related to particular temporal configurations, and analyze
how these constructions of past, present, and future help to justify
accounts of their practices. We divide our results into two sections:
"Negotiating the Past" (including wider family life, and historical and
cultural norms), and "Negotiating the Future."

### Negotiating the Past

We discuss here our respondents' accounts of parenting vis-Ã -vis wider
family life---in particular, their own pasts and their parenting
practices as part of a longer family history. We do so in order to
analyze how, in different ways and with varying consequences,
interviewees framed wider family life as holding significance for how
they adjudicated recommendations regarding their parenting practices. In
addition, we look more broadly at the cultural and historical norms that
arose within the interviews, and how parents situated their parenting
and their engagements with advice in relation to these.

Some respondents discussed their current parenting practices in relation
to their past experiences and their childhood. One mother, Brenda, for
instance, reflected on the wider family context as follows:

Sometimes just things, like, you remember things that you were told as a
child. I remember one of them things, it's just, "the family that eat
together stay together," that's a quote. So I always think it's very
important that we sit down at a table when we can and eat together
[]{.mark}.... And that was, sort of, advice passed on I think, you know,
my mum and my granny, I remember always hearing that.

In the above excerpt, we can see how certain maxims that informed or
encapsulated parenting practices were understood to have been "passed"
down the matrilineal family line, with ramifications regarded as
positive (see Knight, O\'Connell, and Brannen 2014, for a similar
argument). However, Brenda also went on to discuss more negative aspects
of her mother's parenting practices:

And then you remember, you still remember what it was like being a child
yourself and how you felt and things my mum did that I just wouldn't do
because I disagree, you know, how my mum brought up me and my brother
and my sister I think is different from what I'm doing. ... She was
quite competitive about how we were, how well we were doing at school
and things like that. And to me that's not important. As long as they do
their best, as long as my child does their best and concentrates.

Similarly, two mothers who interviewed together, Veronica and Maggie,
reflected on the concept of advice throughout the interview, and the
practices they had "inherited":

Veronica: And I think that's the other thing about advice is that you're
given advice on how to be a parent, but actually you've already
inherited a parenting style from your parents, whether you like it or
not, and that was a huge shock to me was that I began to parent like my
parents, and I hated that. ... I had to go away and deal with it and
sort of unpick it all. Then I put myself back together again in a way
that was how I wanted to be put back together, and I actually undid all
that inherited stuff from my mum and dad. There was lots of good stuff
that I got from my mum and dad, but there was some really unhelpful
stuff, and I just decided that I just didn't want to parent like that.
And you do absorb your parents' parenting style.

Maggie: Absolutely. And that's another form of---

Veronica: That's advice, isn't it?

Maggie: ---family advice as well.

Accordingly, we can see that the "inheritance" of parenting practices is
not necessarily deterministic. Rather, components of the experiential
expertise of participants' parents can be reflexively and actively
adjudicated, reworked, or rejected (see Kromidas 2021 for a similar
analysis).

In the same interview, Veronica and Maggie discussed how to navigate the
emotional landscape of "changing the family script," as they referred to
it, where each choice a parent makes can be seen by their mother as an
implicit criticism regarding how they themselves raised their children.
As Maggie described,

And also I think sometimes the friend network is a more helpful network
of people who are likeminded in a similar situation to you as well at
that time, because you can form ideas and talk things through, whereas
if I talk things through with my mum the advice I get back is based on
being defensive, because she feels like I'm criticizing, even if I'm
not. Like most of the time I'm just trying to work it through for
myself. She'll find because she didn't do that that's a criticism.

Parenting ideas and changing cultural norms may prompt parents and their
parents to reflect on the past, which may result in emotional challenges
such as regret and perceptions of criticisms. This inflects "the advice
I get back," negatively impacting its salience. In this regard,
discussions of Maggie's current practices appear to stimulate her mother
to reinspect her own memories of parenting Maggie. Negotiating temporal
imaginaries also involves the negotiation of associated affects, up and
down the matrilineal line.

Shifting cultural norms and professional enjoinments around good
parenting can also stimulate reflections from mothers upon their own
previous parenting practices, as well as a reappraisal of the practices
of caregivers that shaped their own childhoods. The affects that the
negotiation of these temporal imaginaries could animate included
feelings of regret. This is expressed in the following quote from
Ashley, a mother who, following her participation in the parenting
program, went on to train to become a program facilitator:

Some people drop out after two sessions, because it makes you reflect on
your own parenting skills. And sometimes, some of the things make you
feel guilty 'cause you're like, "oh, I've done that, or I've done that
before, I've said that to them before," and it makes you feel guilty.
And then also, it reflects on your own parents, and how your childhood
was.

Very rarely, participants expressed regret about their past parenting
practices in response to contemporary advice. Veronica, for instance,
described how if she had possessed her current understandings of
theories of attachment in earlier years, she would have parented her
eldest child differently. Nevertheless, she was ultimately able to
conclude that even if she had incorporated current recommendations into
past practices, it "would \[not\] have made a huge difference." This is
illustrative of how, when accounting for regret, a small number of
interviewees sometimes produced configurations of alternate futures
based on "possible pasts" (Morrison 2012) that could be strategically
deployed as repair work within their narratives of being a (good) parent
(see:Kromidas 2021 for a similar analysis).

Another mother, Jane, also built up a picture of the past that she used
to account for the choices she made. She felt current cultural norms did
not sufficiently address the history of humanity, which she wanted to
learn from and partly base her parenting practices upon. For example,
Jane thought positively about co-sleeping with her children, something
that many of the other study participants were more hesitant about, and
she also breastfed longer than is common in the UK. In the excerpt
below, she talks about breastfeeding:

Interviewer (I): So I noticed that you said that you are breastfeeding
\[youngest child\], and I thought that that was longer than people
usually would breastfeed their child, isn't it?

Jane: Yeah.

I: So that's part of the philosophy, then, that you breastfeed as long
as possible?

Jane: Yeah. Yeah. For example, \[at her work\], I'll be sitting next to
people saying, "isn't it terrible, they're breastfed till they're, I
don't know, two, three."

I: They're saying it's terrible?

Jane: Yeah. So it's not a cultural norm. Whereas, I take heart from more
things like anthropological studies, and thinking about the long
pre-human, um, about the long human history, and that we're a blip.

This sense of history has allowed Jane "to do what I want to do. Because
I understand that the conditions we're living in, and the societal
pressures, are very much of the moment." While in general she reflected
that the program in which she participated resonated with her own
parenting philosophy, at times Jane thought "that I perhaps was more
radical, more, if you like, if it was a continuum, further along it,
than sometimes the course was." As an example, she noted that where the
program facilitator told participants that it is better to reward than
to punish children, she argued that the word "no" should not be used at
all in parenting, and she thought current parenting ideas were at times
rather "Victorian." We can see, then, that this interviewee actively
constructed a certain idea of historical parenting practices, assigning
value to some of these over others. She then used them to negotiate any
recommendations she received, and the cultural norms embedded in such
recommendations and parenting practices.

To summarize, parents relied on different constructions of present and
past to negotiate parenting recommendations and what they regarded as
wider norms, and to legitimize their own practices. Some mothers also
reflected on the emotional challenges that could result from consciously
deviating from "inherited" practices of family or cultural norms. In the
next section, we look at what kinds of futures were entailed in
negotiations of expert knowledge and of wider norms and recommendations.
This includes attention to instances where parents might have a
different idea of what they want for the future of their children than
that inscribed within expert discourse.

### Negotiating the Future

Visions of and hopes for the future constituted one reason why many
parents suggested they wanted to participate in the parenting program
from which we recruited for our study. These visions mostly related to
their children's futures and only implicitly to their own, for example,
through accounts of how they would feel about certain future outcomes
for their children. Ashley, for instance, talked about how the parenting
program had helped her to give her children the best chance not to
"grow\[...\] up, like, unhappy, and you don't want your child growing up
without social skills." Later in the interview she talked about this in
relation to brain development:

But it\'s important to know how a child\'s brain develops is all to do
with how you\...what you put in is what you get out. So the more time,
and the more nurture you give your child, the better it will be. Like a
seed---you plant a seed, and you give it no water, and no light, it will
die and wither away. If you give it life, you feed it, you water it, you
give it loads of sunlight, and fresh air, go outside, and if you put it
outside, it will grow into a massive tree.

When asked how she felt about this idea of being able to influence her
children's brain development, Ashley elaborated,

####### I feel relieved, because I know that I can give them the best I can, and
I can try and do the best I can. And having this knowledge to be able to
deliver the best I can, that\'s the best bit. It's be\[ing\] able to
know that this is what\'s wrong, and this is why they\'re doing certain
things, and this is why they\'re behaving that way.

asdlkfjsldkjf alsdjflaksjdf

Hence, the neuroscientific notions encoded within the expertise deployed
through the program was imbricated within, among other respondents,
Ashley's understandings of her parenting practices and the specific
orientation of these towards ensuring a healthy, happy future. In her
account, neuroscientific concepts can be seen as a sensitizing concept
to think about the developing child, as a route to a different kind of
metaphor: an oft-used botanical one, where children are presented as
seedlings, and within which parental nurturance is valourized.^5^ The
result of this metaphorical translation is that rather than as a form of
pressure (Wall 2010), Ashley described neuroscientific knowledge as
producing an experience of "relief."

Another participant, Veronica, reflected on how participating in a
parenting program gave her the "space to think about how you already
were a parent and how you could, how you could do things differently
with a more positive outcome for you and your child." In this way, the
parenting programs acted as forums within which parents were exposed to
different kinds of credentialed and experiential expertise (including
from other parents), and parents reflexively (re)considered present and
future parenting practices in light of this. These reflexive
considerations entailed shifting visions of children's---and, to a
lesser extent, parental---futures.

While parenting programs were one source of parenting knowledge
discussed by our respondents, other sources also figured in their
accounts. Jane, for instance, noted a book that helped her to deal with
issues such as sibling rivalry, as her oldest son was "going through
quite a long, difficult stage of being jealous" of her youngest child.
In her telling, this book provided Jane with a "script" to deal with
jealousy and aggression in a way that "is empowering for everybody," and
did not, for instance, encourage forcing her oldest son to apologize for
confrontational acts. Jane linked this script to a robust vision for the
future, relating to very broad results:

There's a lot that I believe is very much all tied up, a lot of sort of
society\'s bigger problems \[...such as\] education, health, all the big
ones, everything. The way that we talk to each other, happiness. Even,
it can even take it more to things like climate change, and like, if we
felt confident in ourselves, then we\'d be able to build stronger
communities, you know, it would just have all these wonderful
repercussions.

Thus, Jane expressed a political imaginary in which responsible parents
can help shape the future not just for their own children but for
everyone. Jane was the only respondent that explicitly linked the way
she raised her children to an imaginary of the future for society in
general.

In a different way, Thea and Charlie, the two mothers with whom we
opened this paper, were concerned that the recommendations received in
the parenting program they had participated in did not sufficiently
address the hardships they saw as laying ahead of their children. They
discussed how the emphasis on children's needs within parenting programs
is not necessarily unwarranted or undesirable, but that it nevertheless
does not always prepare children well for the future. The two friends
talked about how they and their parents were raised, including how their
parents "got the belt" as a punishment, and how they themselves would
not speak rudely to their parents while parents nowadays were advised
not to raise their voices to children. Thea gave the example of one of
their friends whose "neighbor complained, so she \[the friend\] had to
go to a class on why you can't shout at your child," and continued to
discuss contemporary parenting ideas:

We want children to be happy and stuff like that, but they're taking
liberties. Like, they're just...they're letting them run riot and it is
going to be worse in twenty years' time, because everybody's going to be
taking drugs and it's not going to be a big deal and ..., nobody's got
any authority any more, 'cause your mum...you cannae have authority at
home, then...and there's no authority out and about, do you ken \[know\]
what I mean, then what are you meant to do? Nobody's going to be able to
control their kids because we cannae hit...smack bums. You can't fret on
them. You can't shout at them. ... And I'm like, that's great. That's
great for them now. Like, brilliant. Do you know what I mean, we'll have
really good babies and that, but when they're adults, what are they
going to be like then? And they're trying to say that they're growing
into better individuals and that. And I'm like, well the world's a lot
worse now. But I cannae do...they never had all these bums, people not
working, people on so much drugs, like, killing people and stuff like
that back...and those people were terrified, like, I'm not going to do
that. If my mum finds out, I'm going to get a foot up the arse, ken \[do
you know\] what I mean?

Thus, temporal configurations of imagined pasts and anticipated futures
can serve to legitimate current parenting practices that are regarded as
having contextual salience within parents' lives, and hence delegitimize
the recommendations received in various parenting programs. In line with
Kromidas (2021), we could analyze this as parents drawing on an image of
their own childhood and the future that childhood enabled for them, in
order to think about the present and the future of their own children,
or "to shape how children's past will shape their futures" (Kromidas
2021, 49). The construction of such temporal imaginaries within Thea and
Charlie's talk can also be regarded as a reaction to some of the
middle-class norms that are imbued within anglophonic brain-based
parenting advice (Edwards, Gillies, and Horsley 2015).

Other interviewees---in particular, some of the fathers---appeared to
feel less able to negotiate the future. Two of them did not have shared
custody of their children and were not allowed to see much of them. For
instance, Mark was permitted to see his daughter with supervision for a
couple of hours per week. He did not complete the parenting program
because he "missed too much of it to pass." In the interview, he asked,
rhetorically, "Why do I need a bit of paper to tell me...to tell
somebody that I ken \[know\] how to raise a child with confidence?" He
spoke of the importance of attachment for his daughter, without
elaborating on where he'd learned of this concept and its import.
However, Mark felt that he was insufficiently involved in his daughter's
life to be able to implement the recommendations he had received around
attachment-based parenting, which appeared to enjoin some anxieties
about the future relationship he might have with his child:

I ken how to do it \[know how an attachment is formed\]; I spoke to my
mum about how to do it and she said, 'well, if that's how you believe it
needs to be done, then you need to do it, but you'll need to wait until
all this \[custody battle\] is done," but it might be too late by then.
Once a child becomes two, that's when it gets harder to form more, form
more, stronger bonds with other people without them being afraid of
other people.

The capacities of parents to render parenting recommendations actionable
and to reflect on, contest, or rework them may thus be impacted by wider
factors and contexts that shape parental agency and practices. Alongside
other matters that constrained both his and his former partner's ability
to parent their child as they wished, Mark also spoke of how gendered
norms impacted his parenting: "society says women look after bairns
\[children\], dad works" (see also Miller 2011; Schmitz 2016). Such
norms about the "proper" role of men and women in relation to their
children can themselves be read as enjoinments that can be reflexively
negotiated and, to an extent, even contested while simultaneously being
capitulated to (as well, of course, as being justifications for the
gendered labor of childcare).

To conclude this section, we have indicated how parents negotiate the
future inscribed within recommendations, which sometimes did and
sometimes did not align with their own visions for their and their
children's futures. The parenting programs in particular were presented
as opening up possibilities for these futures, about which some parents
expressed feelings of relief (such as interviewees Ashley, Veronica, and
Maggie). Finally, a small subset of parents, mostly fathers from a lower
socioeconomic background, reflected that they could not negotiate or
implement recommendations in practice because of restrictions on whether
or how they could interact with their children.

### Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper we have presented an analysis of how the future and the
past can be cast and reconfigured through parents' reflexive and
sometimes critical negotiations with different kinds of recommendations:
from expert guidance, to family suggestions, to wider parenting norms.
Parents used both "the" past and their (parents') pasts to reflect on
their parenting practices, and to selectively adopt, adapt, and reject
recommendations. This often involved navigating the emotional landscape
of wider family life, where advice received was based on---or
occasionally clashed with---the experiential expertise of their own
mothers. Simultaneously, some of the parents we interviewed critically
questioned notions inscribed within recommendations---for example, about
the negative future consequences of putting children's needs central now
and shielding them from the realities of life. Experiential expertise
suffused the accounts elicited, melding with or directly challenging
especially the credentialed expertise deployed through parenting
programs. Parents are far from cultural---or epistemic---dopes
(Garfinkel 1967), but rather actively negotiate different kinds of
knowledge and norms.

In relation to the parenting programs from which we recruited, the
neuroscientific advice therein played a role in how parents thought
about the future of their children---and, vice versa, what they thought
about the future of their children influenced whether and how they
adopted neuroscientific advice. When talking about the advice they
received both in parenting programs and more widely, though,
neuroscientific advice was but one epistemic resource---and was not
necessarily the most central. Rather, and resonant with Whiteley's et
al. (2017) analysis, neuroscientific advice was adopted reflexively and
pragmatically, when it aligned with specific visions of the past and
future that parents had and when it aligned with their epistemologies of
parenting. This underscores the findings of prior research on
neuroscience and society (Pickersgill et al. 2015), and what we have
elsewhere referred to as the mundane significance of the brain
(Pickersgill et al. 2011). In other words, the brain is commonly framed
in everyday life as a significant yet by no means a dominant actant
through which understandings of selves and others are synthesized (see
also Coveney 2011; Netherland 2011; O\'Connor, Rees, and Joffe 2012;
Fitzgerald 2014; O'Connor and Joffe 2014). The extent to which, and how,
the brain is significant depends on people's circumstances and the
diverse epistemologies they bring to bear in self-making.

Moreover, even when particular styles of parenting that had been
imparted by professionals as valorous (most notably, attachment-based
parenting) were highlighted as important, parents were not always able
to shape their practices accordingly due to the wider context in which
they parented. This was evident in the accounts of some of the fathers
we spoke with, such as Mark, as well as apparent through our interview
discussions with two mothers who had considerable contact with social
work. While the nature of our sample means we can only be tentative
about any kind of demographic claims-making, we nevertheless found
indications that both social class and gender, and especially the
intersections between them, shaped the extent to which, and how, parents
felt able to negotiate the advice they receive, and sometimes whether
they even received any advice at all.

While we did not only recruit women to our study, our analysis has
nevertheless foregrounded the talk of mothers. This reflects their
preponderance in our interview sample, which matches in turn the fact
that by far the majority of participants in the parenting programs we
recruited from were women---reflecting the gendered work of childcare.
Our use of the term *parents* relates to the inclusion of fathers and
other male relatives in our interviews. However, we are also aware of
how the term *parenting* itself can render invisible the labor of
specifically female caregivers (see Gillies 2006 for a similar
point)---labor that can be especially complex for women living in
poverty (Gillies 2006; Mendenhall 2018; Turner 2020; Randles 2021). We
thus share the concerns of other authors that unreflexive considerations
of "parenting programs" can invisibilize women even as they remain the
primary or sole family participant in these (Gillies 2006). At the same
time, we remain mindful of the need for the sociology of parenting to
continue to push beyond a traditional focus on cisgendered, often
heterosexual mothers that perhaps still characterizes too much of the
scholarly literature (including our own work).

Our analysis has taken cues from scholarship in the sociology of
science, and in particular perspectives around time and expectations
(Brown and Michael 2003; Borup et al. 2006; Morrison 2012). This has
formed a useful analytical lens for studying how parents construct
"possible pasts and promissory futures" (Morrison 2012) to make sense of
diverse recommendations, and how they are enfolded in accounts of their
own parenting practices. Extending Whiteley et al.'s (2017) analysis of
"time-travelling talk" and Svendsen et al.'s (2018) analysis on temporal
imaginaries in diverse caring practices, we have demonstrated that
temporal imaginaries can play an important role in how parents
reflexively develop and situate their own epistemologies of parenting.
Temporal imaginaries, as Svendsen et al. (2018) have hinted at, are also
a way of caring for particular pasts, presents, and futures. They are
inflected by what respondents (can) care about, and in turn they
influence parenting or caring practices. The discursive and experiential
traffic between temporal imaginaries and caring/parenting practices
would be a useful analytical focus for future work at the interface of
feminist sociology and technoscience studies critically examining the
gendered, raced, and classed dimensions of contemporary parenting
advice, and its reception, negotiation, and instantiation within
everyday life.

### Acknowledgments

We are very grateful to our respondents for their time and reflections,
as well as the reviewers and editors for their careful, close, and
generous engagement with our manuscript. This research was funded by the
Leverhulme Trust \[Grant number RPG-2013-066\] and in part by the
Wellcome Trust \[Grant numbers WT094205MA; WT106612MA; 209519/Z/17/Z\].
For the purpose of open access, we have applied a CC BY public copyright
license to the author-accepted manuscript version arising from this
submission.

### Notes

^1^ All names are pseudonyms. None of these are intended to convey any
characteristics or backgrounds of our interviewees.

^2^ As the literature we cite indicates, there are already critical
analyses of such programs, and we certainly take cues from these.
However, our aim through this paper---and the project from which is
emerged--- is to center the experiences of parents (usually, mothers)
themselves who participated in these activities. Many of them
appreciated the sociality and learnings that the programs provided, and
we do not wish to decenter their experiences simply because we ourselves
remain more skeptical of some of the normative and epistemic regimes
through which they are configured.

^3^ It arose in one interview (Interview 15) that, while the respondent
had been engaged in various parenting courses, he had not formally
completed the program from which we recruited: he had only done "bits
and bobs," and hence not enough to "pass." However, his answers were
still relevant in relation to how expert knowledge is negotiated in
relation to parenting, and so we included his interview in the sample as
well. Another interviewee (Interview 7) was part of a parenting group,
but had not yet taken part in the parenting program. Her answers are not
included in the article, as they were not relevant for the analysis.

^4^ For an example of such an approach, see "Five to Thrive,"
<https://fivetothrive.org.uk/approach/>.

^5^ We thank the anonymous reviewer for pointing out the emphasis on
botanical metaphors in this respondent's account.

### References

Arribas-Ayllon, Michael, Andrew Bartlett, and Katie Featherstone. 2010.
"Complexity and Accountability: The Witches' Brew of Psychiatric
Genetics." *Social Studies of Science* 40 (4): 499--524.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312710363511](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0306312710363511).

Bell, Kirsten, Darlene McNaughton, and Amy Salmon. 2009. "Medicine,
Morality and Mothering: Public Health Discourses on Foetal Alcohol
Exposure, Smoking around Children and Childhood Overnutrition."
*Critical Public Health* 19 (2): 155--70.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09581590802385664>.

Borup, Mads, Nik Brown, Kornelia Konrad, and Harro Van Lente. 2006. "The
Sociology of Expectations in Science and Technology." *Technology
Analysis & Strategic Management* 18 (3--4): 285--98.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09537320600777002>.

Bowlby, John. 1969. *Attachment and Loss.* Vol. 1, *Attachment.* New
York: Basic Books.

Broer, Tineke, and Martyn Pickersgill. 2015. "(Low) Expectations,
Legitimization, and the Contingent Uses of Scientific Knowledge:
Engagements with Neuroscience in Scottish Social Policy and Services."
*Engaging Science, Technology, and Society*, no. 1, 47--66.
[https://doi.org/10.17351/ests2015.003.](https://doi.org/10.17351/ests2015.003)

Broer, Tineke, Martyn Pickersgill, and Sarah Cunningham-Burley. 2020.
"Neurobiological Limits and the Somatic Significance of Love:
Caregivers' Engagements with Neuroscience in Scottish Parenting
Programmes." *History of the Human Sciences* 33 (5): 85--109.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695120945966](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0952695120945966).

Brosnan, Caragh. 2011. "The Sociology of Neuroethics: Expectational
Discourses and the Rise of a New Discipline." *Sociology Compass* 5 (4):
287--97.
[https://doi:10.1111/J.1751-9020.2011.00365.X.](https://doi:10.1111/J.1751-9020.2011.00365.X)

Brown, Nik, and Mike Michael. 2003. "A Sociology of Expectations:
*Retrospecting Prospects and Prospecting Retrospects*." *Technology
Analysis & Strategic Management* 15 (1): 3--18.
[[https://doi.org/10.1080/0953732032000046024]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1080/0953732032000046024).

Budds, Kirsty, Margaret K. Hogg, Emma N. Banister, and Mandy Dixon.
2017. "Parenting Agendas: An Empirical Study of Intensive Mothering and
Infant Cognitive Development." *The Sociological Review* 65 (2):
336--52.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0038026116672812](https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1177/0038026116672812).

Coveney, Catherine M. 2011. "Cognitive Enhancement? Exploring Modafinil
Use in Social Context." In *Sociological Reflections on the
Neurosciences*, edited by Martyn Pickersgill and Ira Van Keulen,
203--28. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Duschinsky, Robbie, Monica Greco, and Judith Solomon. 2015. "Wait Up!:
Attachment and Sovereign Power." *International Journal of Politics,
Culture, and Society* 28 (3): 223--42.
[https://doi:10.1007/s10767-014-9192-9.](https://doi:10.1007/s10767-014-9192-9)

Edwards, Rosalind, Val Gillies, and Nicola Horsley. 2015. "Brain Science
and Early Years Policy: Hopeful Ethos or 'Cruel Optimism'?" *Critical
Social Policy* 35 (2): 167--87.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018315574020](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0261018315574020).

Faircloth, Charlotte. 2014. "Intensive Parenting and the Expansion of
Parenting." In *Parenting Culture Studies*, edited by Lee Ellie, Jennie
Bristow, Charlotte Faircloth and Jan Macvarish, 25--50. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.

Featherstone, Brid, Kate Morris, and Sue White. 2013. "A Marriage Made
in Hell: Early Intervention Meets Child Protection." *British Journal of
Social Work* 44 (7): 1735--49.
[https://doi:10.1093/bjsw/bct052](https://doi:10.1093/bjsw/bct052).

Fitzgerald, Des. 2014. "The Trouble with Brain Imaging: Hope,
Uncertainty and Ambivalence in the Neuroscience of Autism.\"
*BioSocieties* 9 (3): 241--61. <https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2014.15>.

Garfinkel, Harold. 1967. *Studies in Ethnomethodology*. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Gillies, Val. 2006. *Marginalised Mothers: Exploring Working Class
Experiences of Parenting*. London: Routledge.

Glabau, Danya. 2019. "Food Allergies and the Hygienic Sublime."
*Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience* 5 (2): 1--26.
<https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v5i2.32070>.

Hays, Sharon. 1998. *The Cultural Contradictions of Motherhood*. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Hughes, Daniel A., and Jonathan Baylin. 2012. *Brain-Based Parenting:
The Neuroscience of Caregiving for Healthy Attachment*. New York: W.W.
Norton & Company.

Keenan, Julia, and Helen Stapleton. 2010. "Bonny Babies? Motherhood and
Nurturing in the Age of Obesity." *Health, Risk & Society* 12 (4):
369--83. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13698571003792926>.

Kehily, Mary Jane, and Rachel Thomson. 2011. "Figuring Families:
Generation, Situation and Narrative in Contemporary Mothering."
*Sociological Research Online* 16 (4): 164--73.
[https://doi.org/10.5153/sro.2536](https://doi.org/10.5153%2Fsro.2536).

Knaak, Stephanie J. 2010. "Contextualising Risk, Constructing Choice:
Breastfeeding and Good Mothering in Risk Society." *Health, Risk &
Society* 12 (4): 345--55. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13698571003789666>.

Knight, Abigail, Rebecca O\'Connell, and Julia Brannen. 2014. "The
Temporality of Food Practices: Intergenerational Relations, Childhood
Memories and Mothers\' Food Practices in Working Families with Young
Children." *Families, Relationships and Societies* 3 (2): 303--18.
<https://doi.org/10.1332/204674313X669720>.

Kromidas, Maria. 2021. "'When I Was a Kid': Childhood Memories, Care
Work, and Becoming Mom." *Subjectivity*, no. 14, 36--52.
<https://doi.org/10.1057/s41286-021-00113-4>[.]{.smallcaps}

Leaver, Tama. 2017. "Intimate Surveillance: Normalizing Parental
Monitoring and Mediation of Infants Online." *Social Media + Society* 3
(2).
[https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305117707192](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F2056305117707192)[.]{.smallcaps}

Lee, Ellie. 2008. "Living with Risk in the Age of 'Intensive
Motherhood': Maternal Identity and Infant Feeding." *Health, Risk &
Society* 10 (5): 467--77.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13698570802383432>[.]{.smallcaps}

Lee, Ellie, Jan Macvarish, and Jennie Bristow. 2010. "Risk, Health and
Parenting Culture.\" *Health, Risk & Society* 12 (4): 293--300.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13698571003789732>.

Lowe, Pam. 2016. "Responsible 'Choices' and Good Motherhood." In
*Reproductive Health and Maternal Sacrifice: Women, Choice and
Responsibility*, 17--45. SpringerLink. Ebook.

Lowe, Pam, Ellie Lee, and Jan Macvarish. 2015a. "Biologising Parenting:
Neuroscience Discourse, English Social and Public Health Policy and
Understandings of the Child." *Sociology of Health & Illness* 37 (2):
198--211. [https://doi.org/
10.1111/1467-9566.12223](https://doi.org/%2010.1111/1467-9566.12223).

---------. 2015b. "Growing Better Brains? Pregnancy and Neuroscience
Discourses in English Social and Welfare Policies.\" Health, Risk &
Society 17 (1): 15--29. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13698575.2014.994479>.

Lupton, Deborah A. 2011. "'The Best Thing for the Baby': Mothers'
Concepts and Experiences Related to Promoting Their Infants' Health and
Development." *Health, Risk & Society* 13 (7--8): 637--51.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13698575.2011.624179>.

Macvarish, Jan, Ellie Lee, and Pam Lowe. 2014. "The 'First Three Years'
Movement and the Infant Brain: A Review of Critiques." *Sociology
Compass* 8 (6): 792--804. <https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12183>.

---------. 2015. "Neuroscience and Family Policy: What Becomes of the
Parent?" *Critical Social Policy* 35 (2): 248--69.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018315574019>.

Mendenhall, Ruby. 2018. "The Medicalization of Poverty in the Lives of
Low-Income Black Mothers and Children." *The Journal of Law, Medicine &
Ethics* 46 (3): 644--50. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1073110518804218>.

Miller, Tina. 2011. "Falling Back into Gender? Men's Narratives and
Practices around First-Time Fatherhood." *Sociology* 45 (6): 1094--109.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038511419180](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0038038511419180).

Morrison, Michael. 2012. "Promissory Futures and Possible Pasts: The
Dynamics of Contemporary Expectations in Regenerative Medicine."
*BioSocieties* 7 (1): 3--22. <https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2011.24>.

Netherland, Julie. 2011. "'We Haven\'t Sliced Open Anyone\'s Brain Yet':
Neuroscience, Embodiment and the Governance of Addiction." In
*Sociological Reflections on the Neurosciences*, edited by Martyn
Pickersgill and Ira Van Keulen, 153--77. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing Limited.

O'Connor, Cliodhna, and Helene Joffe. 2014. \"Social Representations of
Brain Research: Exploring Public (Dis)engagement with Contemporary
Neuroscience." *Science Communication* 36 (5): 617--45.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547014549481](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1075547014549481).

O'Connor, Cliodhna, Geraint Rees, and Helene Joffe. 2012. "Neuroscience
in the Public Sphere." *Neuron* 74 (2): 220--26.
[https://doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.004](https://doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.004).

O'Key, Victoria, and Siobhan Hugh-Jones. 2010. "'I Don't Need Anybody to
Tell Me What I Should Be Doing': A Discursive Analysis of Maternal
Accounts of (Mis)trust of Healthy Eating Information.\" *Appetite* 54
(3): 524--32.
[https://doi:10.1016/j.appet.2010.02.007](https://doi:10.1016/j.appet.2010.02.007).

Pickersgill, Martyn, Sarah Cunningham-Burley, and Paul Martin. 2011.
\"Constituting Neurologic Subjects: Neuroscience, Subjectivity and the
Mundane Significance of the Brain.\" *Subjectivity* 4 (3): 346-365.
<https://doi.org/10.1057/sub.2011.10>.

Pickersgill, Martyn, Martin, Paul and Cunningham-Burley, Sarah. 2015.
"The Changing Brain: Neuroscience and the Enduring Import of Everyday
Experience." *Public Understanding of Science* 24(7): 878-892.
[https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0963662514521550](https://dx.doi.org/10.1177%2F0963662514521550).

Randles, Jennifer. 2021. "'Willing to Do Anything for My Kids':
Inventive Mothering, Diapers, and the Inequalities of Carework.\"
*American Sociological Review* 86 (1): 35--59.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122420977480](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0003122420977480).

Rose, Nikolas. 1998. *Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power, and
Personhood*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rose, Nikolas, and Peter Miller. 1992. "Political Power beyond the
State: Problematics of Government." *British Journal of Sociology*:
173--205.
[https://doi.org/10.2307/591464.](https://doi.org/10.2307/591464)

Ryan, Kath, Paul Bissell, and Jo Alexander. 2010. "Moral Work in
Women\'s Narratives of Breastfeeding." *Social Science & Medicine* 70
(6): 951--58.
[http://doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.11.023](http://doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.11.023).

Schmitz, Rachel M. 2016. "Constructing Men as Fathers: A Content
Analysis of Formulations of Fatherhood in Parenting Magazines." *The
Journal of Men's Studies* 24 (1): 3--23.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1060826515624381](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1060826515624381).

Song, Felicia Wu, Jennifer Ellis West, Lisa Lundy, and Nicole Smith
Dahmen. 2012. "Women, Pregnancy, and Health Information Online: The
Making of Informed Patients and Ideal Mothers." *Gender & Society* 26
(5): 773--98.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243212446336](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0891243212446336).

Svendsen, Mette N. 2015. "Selective Reproduction: Social and Temporal
Imaginaries for Negotiating the Value of Life in Human and Animal
Neonates." *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* 29 (2): 178--95.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/maq.12149>.

Svendsen, Mette N., Laura E. Navne, Iben M. GjÃ¸dsbÃ¸l, and Mie S. Dam.
2018. "A Life Worth Living: Temporality, Care, and Personhood in the
Danish Welfare State." *American Ethnologist* 45 (1): 20--33.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/amet.12596>.

Thornton, Davi Johnson. 2011. "Neuroscience, Affect, and the
Entrepreneurialization of Motherhood." *Communication and
Critical/Cultural Studies* 8 (4): 399--424.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14791420.2011.610327>.

Turner, Jennifer L. 2020. "Black Mothering in Action: The Racial-Class
Socialization Practices of Low-Income Black Single Mothers." *Sociology
of Race and Ethnicity* 6 (2): 242--53.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/2332649219899683](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F2332649219899683).

Wall, Glenda. 2001. "Moral Constructions of Motherhood in Breastfeeding
Discourse." *Gender & Society* 15 (4): 592--610.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/089124301015004006](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F089124301015004006).

---------. 2010. "Mothers' Experiences with Intensive Parenting and
Brain Development Discourse." *Women\'s Studies International Forum* 33
(3): 253--63. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2010.02.019>.

Whiteley, Louise, Emily Borgelt, S. Evelyn Stewart, and Judy Illes.
2017. "Parent Perspectives on Brain Scans and Genetic Tests for OCD:
Talking of Difficult Presents, Desired Pasts, and Imagined Futures."
*BioSocieties* 12 (4): 471--93.
<https://doi.org/10.1057/s41292-017-0046-3>.

Zhang, Shaoying, and Derek McGhee. 2019. "Governing through 'the Family'
in China: Cultivating Ethical Political Subjects through Officials'
'nearest and dearest.'" *Families, Relationships and Societies* 8 (3):
495--510. <https://doi.org/10.1332/204674318X15271465130398>.

### Author Bios

**Tineke Broer** is an Assistant Professor at Tilburg University,
currently working at the Tilburg Institute for Law, Technology, and
Society. Previously, Tineke was a Research Fellow at the University of
Edinburgh. Tineke works across medical sociology and science and
technology studies.

**Martyn Pickersgill** is Chair of the Sociology of Science and Medicine
at the University of Edinburgh. He is also Associate Director of the
Centre for Biomedicine, Self and Society. Martyn's research in the
social dimensions of biomedicine intersects sociology, STS, and the
medical humanities.

**Sarah Cunningham-Burley** is Chair of Medical and Family Sociology at
the University of Edinburgh. She is also Co-Director of the Centre for
Biomedicines, Self and Society. Sarah\'s research focusses on the social
and ethical contexts of medical technologies, data science, engagement,
and health and disease.
