#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  Stringing, Reconnecting, and Breaking the Colonial "Daisy Chain": From Botanic Garden to Seed Bank 

Xan Sarah Chacko

Wellesley College

xchacko@wellesley.edu

### 

### Abstract

Transported through colonial technologies such as Wardian cases and
imperial ships, or simply popped in envelopes and sent via the postal
service, the reproductive bodies of plants have been extracted,
commodified, reproduced, and proliferated to satisfy human needs and
desires. The ongoing and historical movement of plants and their
reproductive capacity---known now through the disembodied clinical
term *germplasm*---for economic, social, political, and agricultural
purposes provides a lens through which global fertility chains can be
studied. I study one such fertility chain: the movement of seeds of
plants into frozen vaults known as "seed banks." While colonial plant
movements are associated with exploitative control, newer plant
extractions for seed banking are shielded from rebuke because they
embody the unquestionably positive valence of "biodiversity
conservation." The view from Australia captures the awkwardness of seed
banking as a reproductive technology because the ongoing tensions
between Indigenous struggles and settler-colonial nation building, and
the urgency around climate change, are far from resolved. The politics
of the Anthropocene are particularly poignant in Australia because
anthropogenic destruction looks very different when viewed from the
perspective of either Indigenous people or settlers.

### Keywords 

Colonial botany, seed banking, Australia, conservation, settler
colonialism, botanic gardens

### Introduction

I arrived in Australia to start my research fellowship at the University
of Queensland in late spring 2018. I was to make my home in the city of
Brisbane---Meanjin in Turrbal^1^---with little expectation of
familiarity: I had, after all, never lived in Australia. I discovered
that I had been passively training for assimilation in Brisbane long
before considering a job here. My senses had been attuned to particular
cultural, social, and spatial forms simply by virtue of being from
another former British colony. I was prepared to encounter the familiar
smell of gum trees (*Eucalyptus*) that had been a part of my childhood
at a boarding school in southern India, but what made this place even
more familiar than I could have imagined, were the jacarandas
(*Jacaranda mimosifolia*) that were all ablaze in their flame-blue
flowers seemingly synchronized to my arrival (Figure 1). Seeing the
pavements strewn with the telltale slippery traces of fallen purplish
blossoms made me feel at home in those first weeks of finding my way
around. It should not have surprised me that trees that I associated
with my home were also prevalent in Australia: we shared the same
subtropical humid weather, and, more crucially, the same colonial power
had exerted control over both our botanic destinies. We shared a
*natureculture*: an entangled human and more-than-human experience of
being in the world (Haraway 1999, 25). I would have the same familiarity
with the jacaranda had I lived in Johannesburg, Lusaka, Alicante, or San
Diego. The tree's preponderance is not only a testament to its striking,
however fleeting, beauty, but also to the fertile botanic chains that
have enabled a tree native to south-central South America to spread its
roots around the globe in the last two centuries.

Trees, like the jacaranda, form enduring traces of a shared colonial
past. Like monuments, cities, streets, or train stations names, they
carry the memory of the violence and subjugation of coloniality. Trees
chosen for particular ornamental or economic value and transplanted
across similar climes come to occupy cultural value---sometimes pride,
sometimes derision---in the new places they call home. Great efforts are
made to secure (or curtail) the reproductive futures of plants, and
studying the language and practices of botanic fertility chains
illuminates the inherent eugenic and biopolitical logic of controlling
reproduction---both plant and human.^2^ The breeding of plants to
produce offspring that carry particular traits is considered logical and
desirable. Two spectral presences in human reproduction, eugenics and
miscegenation, are absent in the realm of plant reproduction where,
uncoupled from their moralistic valence, it is wholly desirable to
strive towards perfection in form through controlled sexual reproduction
of compatible species across the globe. Moreover, keeping plants alive
in order to continue the possibility of human life has been systematized
through neoliberal concepts such as "ecosystem services" where
more-than-human liveliness is translated into functional use in
supporting human life (and capitalism). I study a fertility chain: the
collection and transfer of seeds from instantiations of human-plant
relation (like a farm, or the "wilderness") into frozen vaults,
sometimes far away, known as "seed banks." This technoscientific
enterprise has gained popularity in the late twentieth century amidst
the twinned crises of the loss of plant life, both in numbers and kind,
and the insecurity of food production in a changing climate. Seed banks
with their imagined frozen potential are marketed as a solution that
could save entire species of plants, and the entire species of humans
through their value to agriculture, medicine, or industry.^3^ Recent
studies from history, anthropology, and feminist science studies are
thickening and troubling the origin stories (Fenzi and Bonneuil 2016;
Curry 2017; Chacko 2019b), funding (Lewis‐Jones 2019), and politics
(Peres 2019; Harrison 2017) of seed banking. This paper contributes to
this emergent field the argument that even if contemporary conservation
through benevolent international partnerships appears to be egalitarian
and collaborative, in practice these relationships re-embed the colonial
politics of collection and accumulation that characterized an earlier
era.

![This image shows a curved walkway lined with jacarandas in full bloom.
The trees are the subject of the image as they frame the path for the
people to walk. There are a few people in the image but they are small
and looking away from the camera. In the background are bicycles and
some university buildings.
](media/image2.jpg){width="4.0918503937007875in"
height="5.45579615048119in"}

Figure 1. Jacaranda Way at the University of Queensland, 2018 (Photo by
author)

Scholarship on assisted reproductive technology (ART) has shown that the
disembodiment, movement, valuation, and transfer of body parts are part
of a global value chain (Nahman 2008; Kroløkke 2018; Newman and Nahman
2020; Vertommen, Pavone, and Nahman 2021). At the simplest level of
comparison, it is worth noting that the suspension of life in cryogenic
stasis is at the heart of ART and seed banking alike. The ensuing
problematic of temporal disruption, which Risa Cromer (2019)
productively engages in a case where frozen embryos are imbued with
personhood and thus thinking of them as property amounts to enslavement,
also comes back to haunt historical collections in seed banks under
changing regimes of international governance and intellectual property.
In addition to being frozen, the very capacity for disembodiment,
alienation, and circulation---far from the bodies that produced
them---of both gametes and seeds, is an axiomatic unifying factor.
Building on these initial comparisons, the global fertility
chains---both human and plant---share another feature in that the
direction of flow of value and body parts are skewed such that the
Global South is overwhelmingly the provider of labor and bodies in
service of reproduction, fertility chains are thus structured by
geographies of uneven development (Vertommen, Pavone, and Nahman 2021).
Susan Newman and Michal Nahman's (2020) recent work, through the example
of the first commercialized breast milk production from India to
distribution in Australia, adds to this rich literature in both plant
and human reproduction that fits this pattern of the flow of commodified
care. The third node of comparison between the botanic and human global
fertility chains pertains to the national and international governance
that shapes the flow of value and labor. While the comparison between
the global flow of plants and humans is more suited to studies of
migration, "naturalization," invasion, and settlement, the disembodied
form in which seeds---technically understood to be fertilized
embryos---are moved around the world and saved in frozen vaults makes
for a reasonable point of reference to ARTs, which share the same
technology and logics of disembodiment.

In this paper I dwell on the current struggles of a fertility chain of
seeds in Australia that emerged out of the need to seek legitimacy for a
key colonial institution---the botanic garden---in the form of the
neoliberal seed bank. Even as changes in international regulations
attempt to create avenues for justice through the distribution of credit
and wealth in exchange for access to Indigenous plants, I argue that the
replacement of long-term public funding with neoliberal competitive
grants reprioritizes the focus of seed banking towards making more new
collections instead of caring for the seeds that are already under their
purview. I will show that the necropolitical decision to let collections
of seeds die from neglect is an echo of the colonial violence against
the Indigenous people from whose land the plants were, and continue to
be, extracted. While colonial plant movements are associated with
exploitative control, newer plant extractions for seed banking are
shielded from rebuke because they are imbued with the unquestionably
positive valence of "biodiversity conservation."

Australia faces seemingly contradictory challenges when it comes to the
future of plants, food, and agriculture. On one hand, since most of the
crops grown and consumed in Australia come from plants and animals whose
progenitors were imported, maintaining access to genetic diversity from
outside Australia continues to be considered crucial to breeding new
crops that can withstand the challenges of climate change. This explains
the continued interest in "invited invasions," like that of the
jacaranda, into the Australian body politic (Cardozo and Subramaniam
2013). On the other hand, as the island nation comes into its own
identity, Australia has long been self-fashioning as unique from its
colonial roots, with specific ecological constraints and advantages.
Biosecurity in the name of conservation has taken on a powerful valence
because so many of Australia's fauna and flora are not found elsewhere
and are threatened---think koalas and bushfires. News stories with
titles such as "Johnny Depp's Dogs Face Death in Australia" are
testaments to how seriously Australia takes its biosecurity (BBC 2015).
Anthropologist Patrick Wolfe's (2006) work reminds us to regard the
anxieties about preserving uniquely Australian naturescapes as entwined
with the purposeful, systematic, and ongoing erasure of the Indigenous
people from the land. In addition, Emily O'Gorman and Thom van Dooren,
thinking with philosopher Val Plumwood, state that Australian farms
enact the policing of a border between nature and culture by continuing
to eradicate (but always failing to do so) "wild" animals---understood
as pests---because they do not fit the logic of settler-colonial mastery
over the world---in this case, farm (2017, 2). I will show that efforts
to capture and control botanic futures continue practices of alienation
but do so under the valence of a universalizing greater, sometimes
planetary, good.

I am inspired by the tripartite rubric of biological collection offered
by Bronwyn Parry, which explores the dynamics of collection along three
key axes: acquisition, accumulation, and regulated recirculation (2004,
15). This analytic is particularly helpful in following the flow and
trajectories of collected botanic bodies as they pass through the
fertility chain in time. Elsewhere, I write about accumulation through
practices of concentration, purification, and care in seed bank
laboratories (Chacko 2019a). Here, I focus on how acquisition and
recirculation are caught in between differing cosmopolitics of
human-plant relations because of how colonial durabilities reverberate
across the botanical supply chain. This paper moves in three registers.
I begin with the history of the Brisbane Botanic Gardens and follow the
challenges and articulations of the processes of acquisition that it
engendered in Queensland, Australia. I stay with the question of access,
which is an increasingly fraught space of contention. Today, efforts
made to keep native Australian flora and charismatic fauna alive stand
in awkward tension with the necropolitical history of the elimination of
Aboriginal life and the ongoing suppression of Aboriginal rights and
dignity (Wolfe 1994, 2006). The imperative to collect was always
juxtaposed with the projects of introduction. This dual flow of plant
material out of and into the colony forms the basis of the botanic
fertility chain. It served both as enrollment in the colonial botanic
networks centralized from the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, England
(henceforth Kew), as well as, enhancement of the political economy of
the colony of Queensland.

In the second part of the paper, I track Australian botanic chains into
the twentieth and twenty-first centuries to uncover how the newly formed
Australian Seed Bank Partnership (ASBP), between the colonial actor Kew
and a consortium of botanic gardens in Australia, created a patronage
regime that shapes the stakes of collecting under the ecopolitical
valence of conservation. Building on interviews with curators,
scientists, administrators, I analyze the anxieties and troubles faced
by these carers of seeds. Rather than taking the worlding practice of
seed banking as unambiguously "good," through opening up their concerns,
I work to "slow down" an analysis of how institutions rationalize
engaging in these neocolonial alliances despite having "the best
intentions" (Stengers 2005, 995). I take inspiration from scholars who
have questioned the value in postulating a universalizing concept of
"ethics" or "dignity" in the flows of human fertility (Nahman 2008) to
take seriously the intentions of those for whom what is at stake in
reconnecting botanic fertility chains is nothing less than their
institutional survival. In the final section of the article, I consider
the changes in international regulations intended to provide justice to
the "traditional owners" of "plant genetic resources." I argue that the
totalizing power of "climate crisis" and the neoliberal piecemeal
funding model makes it easier, if not sometimes prudent, for scientists
and administrators of historical collections like seed banks and gardens
to sidestep responsibility towards reconciliation. Here, I think with
and modify Carrie Friese's take that "media spectacles regarding
technoscientific making of zoo animals is meant to bring funding for the
zoo" to make a similar case for botanic gardens, where participation in
futuristic technoscientific enterprises like seed banking serves to
generate additional sources of income (2013, 66). In light of the
growing imperative towards reconciliation and recognition of Aboriginal
rights, attempts are being made to think about the use of historic
collections and making of new ones. How historical and contemporary
biological accessions are collected, maintained, distributed, and used
is both a legal and political live wire. Why then would botanic gardens
across Australia maintain close collaborative ties and, in some cases,
connect new links in global fertility chains with an organization, like
Kew, famous for its role in maintaining extractive botanic relations? My
contribution to the literature on colonial global fertility chains is to
show what comes into clear relief when plants, rather than humans, are
made central in the narrative of extraction, commodification,
alienation, and neoliberal control. By paying attention to the history
of botanic fertility chains that allow plants to be collected, stored,
shared, and then left to languish in some cases, I show how the slow
iterative violence (Nixon 2011) of endeavors like plant collecting can
illustrate "imperial durability" (Stoler 2016) as an ongoing "structure
not an event" (Wolfe 2006, 388).

### Stringing the Colonial Botanic Chains

Brisbane's jacarandas were introduced in 1864 by Walter Hill
(1819--1904), the first curator of the Brisbane Botanic Gardens (now
called the City Botanic Gardens). Born in Scots dyke, Scotland, Hill was
apprenticed as a gardener at the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, before
accepting a position in 1843 as the foreman of propagation and new plant
departments at the pinnacle of botanical science, the Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew (*Journal of the Kew Guild* 1904). Much scholarly attention
has been paid to both the processes of plant acquisitions in the
colonial context (Schiebinger 2009; Bleichmar 2012; Osseo-Asare 2014),
and the re-circulation of expertise in the form of administrators,
curators, and botanists (Grove 1996; Endersby 2008; Schaffer et al.
2009). Starting with the jacaranda, it is the aim of this paper to
examine the enduring logics of colonialism (Stoler 2016) that pervade
the historiography of plant extraction (Parry 2004; Hayden 2003). The
jacarandas and Hill are entwined in a fertile chain. After nearly ten
years of working at Kew, Hill sought a position as the curator of the
Cambridge Botanic Garden, for which he received a recommendation letter
from the director of the Kew Gardens, William Hooker. Unsuccessful in
this application and with little hope for upward mobility at Kew, Hill
and his wife, Jane, migrated to Sydney on board the *Maitland* in
October 1851. With skills in acclimatizing plants, and the experience of
having worked at a focal node in the vast imperial network of botanic
fertility chains, Hill was ready to be woven inextricably into the
threads of the colonial tapestry. In 1855 he was chosen to be the first
curator of the newly established botanic garden in Brisbane. More than
five hundred miles from Sydney, Brisbane represented the northern
outpost of the colony of New South Wales (Evans 2007). With land (nine
acres) and a stipend (£500), Hill set out to acclimatize plants from
around the world that might suit the subtropical biogeography of
Brisbane.^4^ Jacarandas are just one example of this acclimatizing
fervor (Osborne 2000) but have captured the public imaginary because of
their striking color.

Perhaps one of Hill's most famous plantings of jacaranda in the Brisbane
Botanic Gardens was captured in the painting *Under the Jacaranda*, by
R. Godfrey Rivers in 1903 (Figure 2). The painting shows two women and
one man dwarfed under a magnificent jacaranda in full bloom. On close
inspection, the painting reveals a familiar domestic scene of a seated
couple taking tea served by a uniformed standing woman. Painted just
three years after the independence of Australia, the painting captures
two critical features of the settler colony: (1) living introductions
(of both human and plant species) are thriving; (2) everyday social
norms, hierarchies, and routines are not just maintained but
flourishing. The towering purple-flowered tree is an icon of
subtropicality, while the tea set is an anchor linking the space to
Britain, via another crucial plant of the Empire: tea. The culture
represented by the tea set makes the tree seem at home within the
settled nation. While this iconic tree was blown down by a cyclone in
1980, the botanic garden continues to be a central site where the
enterprise of early colonial history is made evident through botanic
traces.

![An oil painting of a gigantic jacaranda in bloom that takes up most of
the canvas. At the base of the tree are a woman and a man seated around
a small table being served tea but a black and white uniformed
waitperson. The woman is wearing a light dress, a floral hat, and holds
up a red parasol. The man reads from a menu being held by the
waitperson.](media/image3.png){width="5.470511811023622in"
height="7.476367016622922in"}

Figure 2. R. Godfrey Rivers *Under the Jacaranda* 1903 (Oil on canvas,
Reproduced with permission of the Queensland Art Gallery, Brisbane)

Trees like the jacaranda were introduced to places far from their
origins but are now a part of the fabric of the entangled postcolonial
and settler-colonial experience. According to the website Environmental
Weeds of Australia, the jacaranda was "naturalized" in 1987.
Naturalization here signifies a moment of transition where an introduced
"foreign" or "exotic'" plant is successful at self-propagation outside
the nurturing influence of humans. The plant for the first time is freed
from the chain of human control and is now regarded as natural.
Ironically, much like new immigrants like myself, the jacaranda is so
good at acclimatizing that it is now considered an "environmental weed"
in New South Wales and Queensland. Much like the jacaranda, my temporary
invitation to stay in Australia was contingent on my continuing to stay
productively employed at the University of Queensland and I am reminded
by the immigration permit issued by the Department of Home Affairs that
my visa can be cancelled if I "behave in a way that is a risk to
somebody in the Australian community" (Temporary Activity (subclass 408)
Visa 2018). What little familiarity is gained from seeing oneself in the
natureculture of a new place through trees must be recalibrated by the
realization that we are, the jacaranda and I, both examples of "invited
invasions" (Cardozo and Subramaniam 2013) that walk the line between
exotic species valued for what they bring to a new place, naturalized
species that are now "at home" but already weeds because they can never
fully belong, and noxious weeds that threaten the body of the nation.^5^

Aside from the jacaranda, Hill is credited for having introduced the
mango, prickly pear, ginger, poinciana, tamarind, and mahogany, and for
coordinating expeditions to the coastal north and interior, bringing
back plants that he thought would be of value, and pouring them into the
Kew pipeline (Langton 2016, 236). Success for colonial naturalists was
achieved not only through the extraction of useful or novel specimens
out of the colony, but also in being able to show that they were able to
acclimatize and profit from the plants sent to them from elsewhere. In
1858 Hill's successful propagation of the macadamia, collected from
North Queensland, within the Brisbane Botanic Gardens' collection marked
the onset of the tree's commercialization and export. When Queensland
separated from New South Wales in 1859, Hill was appointed to the
position of colonial botanist, which legitimized his direct
communication with Kew. Colonial metropoles disciplined contributors to
the colonial botanic chain in the appropriate means of collecting,
preserving, and transporting specimens (Chacko 2018; Endersby 2001).
Only through the continued voyages and land expeditions which brought
new plants to name, propagate, commercialize, and market could the
colonial botanist add value to the imperial state and make contributions
towards the nascent natural sciences (Schiebinger and Swan 2007, 2).

Achille Mbembe articulates the difference between trading post colonies
and settler colonies as one of pure exploitation in the case of the
former and "an extension of the nation" in the case of the latter (2019,
11). The botanical stakes are thus different in settler colonies.
Colonial botanists, such as Hill, were tasked with managing the
exploration of the place they now called home, what Staffan Müller-Wille
calls "colonialism turned inward" (2005, note 10). North Queensland
represented an unknown but latent landscape onto which the somewhat
contradictory desires of exploration and settlement could be enacted. On
one hand, Hill, as natural philosopher, was responsible for
"discovering" many "new" plants that could be enrolled into the botanic
chain, but as a colonial operative, he was also a central figure in the
selection of 500,000 acres of land to create the vast sugarcane
plantations of Queensland. Settler colonialism is not about just
specific moments of collection, "invasion is a structure not an event"
(Wolfe 2006, 388). Equally proud of his contributions in botany and
economy, Hill sent a sample of the first sugar manufactured in
Queensland to London in 1862, as a proof of concept that the colony
could be a productive and fertile contributor to the empire (*Journal of
the Kew Guild* 1904). The relationship between agriculture and botany is
even more direct in settler colonial worlds as
successful---commercial---farming was crucial to the survival of the
settlers (Langton 2016, 224). Extracting Indigenous knowledge of the
uses and toxicities of plants allowed settlers to create the vast
agricultural industries of sugarcane, cattle, and sheep (Evans 2007;
Franklin 2007, 120).

The idea that exploration and collection were necessary for survival
reveals the necropolitics of the settler colony (Mbembe 2019; Kauanui
2016). The success of Hill's missions of collection and expansion of
arable land hinged on the alienation of plants and land from their
Indigenous custodians. Scholars of the history of Australia have shown
that early settlers benefited from the acquisition of Indigenous
naturecultural knowledge, all the while eliminating life, both human and
more-than-human, to make space for the expansion of the colony (Wolfe
2006; Langton 2016). In Hill's obituary published in the *Journal of the
Kew Guild*, an anecdotal story tells of a collecting expedition from
Keppel Bay to Cape York during which most of his party of seven were
killed by "the natives" (1904, 207). After describing in horrific detail
the condition of one of the deceased, the obituary confirms that Hill
and his unnamed Aboriginal guide were the sole survivors. The reason
that Hill was spared death was not his bravery or marksmanship but his
choice to collect plants alone and up a mountain rather than alongside
the beach like the others. The value of the plants found is increased by
the deaths of the white people who were sacrificed in collecting them.
Missing in the record is any mention of the Indigenous people who were
undoubtedly also killed by the expedition party. The description in
Hill\'s obituary juxtaposes the naivete of the European naturalist
against the purported savagery of the Indigenous people. On one hand,
this story reifies the bravery needed in continuing to collect, knowing
that it could be fatal, and on the other hand, the need to bring death
to the Indigenous people first: for, if not swiftly delivered, death
would surely come to the white settlers.^6^

While the historical record captures the accessions as plants in the
botanical garden, and names the white settlers killed during the
expeditions, it is silent on the question of Indigenous deaths. Mbembe
writes about the subterfuges employed to exonerate the supposedly
retaliatory violence perpetrated by white settlers against Indigenous
people:

> the crimes were deeds performed by lone-acting individuals, who
> themselves were racked with fear owing to the animalistic behavior and
> the extreme, barbaric acts of their victims, and were thus overcome by
> the threat to their lives posed by these savages; the horrors
> experienced by the colonized scarcely carried any weight as regards
> the misery they would endure when left to their own devices; what had
> been accomplished in the name of civilization (economic development,
> technological progress, schooling, health, Christianization, and
> assimilation) worked to offset the negative---and allegedly
> inevitable---effects of the colonial project. (2019, 127)

The historical record may be silent, but contemporary artist from
Badtjala, Fraser Island, Queensland, Fiona Foley brings histories of
violence and segregation of the Indigenous people into unassuming
botanical sculptures that dot the public art landscape of Brisbane.
Outside the Brisbane Magistrates Court, her sculpture *Witnessing to
Silence* (2001) takes the form of a circle of long-stemmed lotus and
paving stones that list the ninety-four sites of where Aboriginal people
were massacred in Queensland: a botanic chain bearing witness to the
violence of settlement. There is a second violence necessary to the
creation of colonial botanic chains that is intertwined by the
collecting imperatives of colonial botanists. This estrangement is
coproduced in the mentions of Indigenous peoples in the botanic record
as threats to collectors in the places the collectors sought new and
useful plants for empire. The forced alienation of Indigenous people,
under the guise of "protection," from their naturecultures by practices
of capture and incarceration haunts the history of Australia (Kidd
1997). The Indigenous human-plant relations that scaffold the ecology of
North Queensland are neither recognized nor articulated within the
colonial botanic chain save for mention of local guides who accompanied
the expeditions. Marcia Langton (2016) has shown that Aboriginal
communities in the Cape York Peninsula had extensive knowledge of
plants, including complex uses, seasonal variations, and ecological
relations, most of which were lost to them in the decades following
colonization. Wolfe's concept of the "logic of elimination" (2006, 387)
explains the ease by which Indigenous lives could be sacrificed for the
settler-colonial project of territorial expansion, but I am drawn to
necropolitics as a means of understanding what comes after death. In
this case, it describes the systems of Protectors, Superintendents,
missions, and reserves created to manage Aboriginal life in the latter
half of the nineteenth century. These structures were instrumental in
the reduction of Indigenous people "to a state of pauperization and
widespread malnutrition during the most violent periods of the frontier
and increasingly so during the 'pacification' phases, when food and
ration stratagems were implemented by the Protectorates as critical
weapons in a war of attrition" (Langton 2016, 223).

![This photograph is of the white ceiling of a building from which a
black sculpture hangs. The sculpture is in the shape of the symbol for
infinity or the number 8 on its side. The shape is formed by numerous
small metallic black poppy flowers hanging upside-down, as if they are
growing downwards from the ceiling or have been hanged to
dry.](media/image4.jpg){width="5.550419947506562in"
height="7.400559930008749in"}

Figure 3. Fiona Foley, *Black Opium*, 2006. (State Library of
Queensland, photo by author.)

Here too, another of Foley's artworks creates the possibility of bearing
witness to the history of forced removals. The permanent installation
into the ceiling of the State Library of Queensland, *Black Opium*
(2006) consists of 777 aluminium poppy stems arranged in a figure eight:
the infinity symbol (Figure 3). The unusual placement of the artwork has
the dual effect of, at first, being rendered into the background, but on
recognizing that it is visible from every floor of the library, it
becomes a haunting presence that is impossible to ignore, getting bigger
with each ascending floor. Through the symbolism of an infinity made of
dark poppies, Foley references the ongoing, enduring, and brutal history
of settlement in Queensland. *Black Opium* points specifically to the
Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 and
1901, which was the legislation crucial to the creation of the system of
Protectorates in Queensland, one of which, Bogimbah Creek Reserve, was
built on Foley's ancestral Badtjala land and became a "closed
institution" of incarceration for any Aboriginal person deemed
"unproductive or troublesome" (1897). Expanding on Wolfe's statement
that "invasion is a structure not an event," J. Kēhaulani Kauanui
writes, "settler colonialism is not simply a form of genocide" (2016).
Instead, Kauanui argues that it is the alienation of the Indigenous
people from land (through forced removals), knowledge (through
re-education), and naturecultures (through controlled rations) that
leads to "the elimination of the native *as native*." As Bruce Pascoe
(2014) has convincingly argued, the idea that Indigenous people were not
aware of or intentionally relating to the non-human life in Australia is
contradicted by the first-person narratives of the early white settlers
who themselves described and benefited from the agricultural practices
of the Indigenous people they encountered on their expeditions. It
matters that the historical, anthropological, and archaeological records
have difficulty with recognizing Indigenous practices of more-than-human
relating as "agriculture" in Australia, because doing so serves the
rationale of settler-colonial "civilization" and "progress." The
narrative of "discovery," the valorization of being first to find, use,
and make meaning of, which bestows the privilege of naming---and today
owning---is incompatible with a cosmopolitics that recognizes Indigenous
knowledge and custodial relations with the more-than-human (Blaser and
de la Cadena 2018).

Even contemporary forms of political redress and reconciliation fail to
imagine liveliness outside the Western paradigm. A case in Queensland
(*Mabo v Queensland 1993*) initiated the changes to the Australian
common law doctrine (Native Title Act 1993) that recognizes Indigenous
Australians (both Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander
people) have rights and interests to their land that derive from their
traditional laws and customs. In practice, the effect of Native Title
Act has put the onus of responsibility to prove connections to country
on Indigenous people. This process instrumentalizes anthropological and
archaeological evidence derived from the extractive practices of
settler-colonial history, which had led to the impoverishment of
Indigenous people in the first place (Wolfe 1994). Scholars have argued
that the success of Indigenous communities in being able to mobilize the
Native Title Act to gain mainstream recognition of their rightful
relations with land is a false victory because it serves to legitimize
the settler-colonial nation's authority to bestow rights to those for
whom sovereignty was never ceded (Foley 2020; Wolfe 1994). In the next
sections, I follow the (dis)similarities between colonial botanic chains
and current-day ones, which requires a theoretical reorientation to a
new frame of reference around global unity against the threat of climate
change, held in tension with an increasingly nationalistic and
proprietary regulatory landscape in the extraction and use of plant
bodies.

### Reconnecting Broken Chains

The story of Brisbane's botanic gardens (there are now three) is not
unique. The patterns of settlement in Australia can be matched by the
creation of botanical gardens throughout the fledgling colony (Sydney
1818, Hobart 1818, Melbourne 1846, Adelaide 1855). They were, after all,
important grounds to test the viability of a settlement. Through the
twentieth century, each garden has continued its operation of
acclimatizing foreign plants while showcasing ones found and made
symbolic of that region. A lot has changed for the gardens and their
role in the botanic chains. While they no longer occupy a pivotal role
in the economic botany of a state, gardens continue to be the arbiters
of taxonomic knowledge while remaining as iconic reminders of a more
genteel era. Now, agribusiness companies ---like Mitsui & Co. (grain)
and CSR Sugar---and public breeding programs ---like the Grains Research
and Development Corporation---are responsible for the majority of the
plants introduced into commercial agriculture so the botanic gardens in
Brisbane do not wield the same political power or attract the same
funding they once might have done. Recognizing their role in creating
the unequal distribution of wealth through economic botany, garden
administrators along with international organizations such as the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations came together to
create international regulations to address how value and remuneration
are afforded in botanic fertility chains. These regulations are the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 1993, that endows nations with
sovereign ownership over the living beings within their borders, and the
Nagoya Protocol, 2014, which requires the negotiations of consent and
benefit sharing when extracting organisms for use in industry. In the
case of settler colonies, these regulations must be seen as a resurgence
of "biopolitics" (Foucault 2003) from their necropolitical roots. The
creation of value around the intellectual property of botanical
knowledge and specimens has had confounding effects. Some proponents
claim that the granting of patent and varietal rights is an incentive to
innovation in agriculture, while others show that the rights-based
regime restricts access to living things and thus has a chilling effect
on scientific research (Chapman and Heald 2020; Jaffe and Lerner 2006).
In addition, since the prime movers in the space of agriculture are not
governments but corporations, it has been extremely difficult to
implement these regulations with any noticeable effect.

When their influence in the economy of plants reduced, gardens had to
innovate in their collaborations and activities to stay alive. More and
more, they have come to rely on relationships with partners---like
Kew---to sponsor collecting expeditions under ever tightening rules of
acquisition. Unsurprisingly, the relationships between Kew and each of
the gardens have changed to reflect Australia's proprietary claims, as a
party to the CBD, over the living things within its borders and
territorial waters. Kew has continued to have ties not only to each
local garden but also to the idea of a national garden, evidenced at the
moment of inauguration of the Australian National Botanic Gardens in
Canberra in 1949, when both Prime Minister Ben Chifley and director of
Kew, Sir Edward Salisbury, shared the role of planting the first trees.

The colonial ties remain even today, but instead of whole plants
transported in Wardian cases on imperial ships, today the flow of parts
of plants, such as seeds, can be a bureaucratic nightmare. Anxieties
around biosecurity breaches (Straight 2017) and fears of biopiracy of
sovereign property have made it very difficult to move plants across
borders. However, the valence of new collection and circulation is less
overtly about imperial control and capitalist expansion but is couched
in the language of survival and "biodiversity conservation." In addition
to their traditional practices of collecting and acclimatizing plants,
in the latter half of the twentieth century, many gardens have taken up
the practice of banking seeds that they do not want to propagate for
lack of space or to minimize the cost of maintaining living collections
(Chacko 2019b, 3). Leading the charge to recognize Australia's
uniqueness and the value of "primitive cultigens or land races" was
plant geneticist Otto Frankel (1900--1998), who advocated the importance
of safeguarding diversity through seed banking for the "as yet unknown"
future (1970, 476). Frankel's call to conserve seeds for the future was
motivated by a belief that future science would be able to use this
reservoir in their enhanced "precision and scope for identification and
transfer of genetic elements" (470).

At its core, every seed bank has a freezer, where seeds are stored for
longer than they would naturally stay dormant, but in practice, each
bank has its own logic for choosing what seeds to save, and what
protocols to follow in preparing and maintaining frozen collections. In
England, Kew had started placing seeds in cold storage in the 1960s. By
the turn of the twenty-first century, they leveraged their experience in
freezing seeds with the international awareness about the loss of plant
life and diversity into a new facility that both renewed their
commitment and cemented their position in leading the charge to
safeguard the future of plants (Chacko 2019b). It was originally called
the Millennium Seed Bank (MSB) Project, with a prime directive to bank
the entirety of the known flora of the United Kingdom. Recognizing
quickly that once that project was accomplished, the expansion of
collection could only extend beyond the bounds of the nation-state under
carefully negotiated agreements, the project was renamed the Millennium
Seed Bank Partnership. Recentering collaboration in the naming of this
facility is purposeful and understood as a political strategy that
reopens access to the world, under presumably more egalitarian
conditions than in the colonial era; this is what the CBD and Nagoya
Protocol were designed to accomplish. The Partnership---now in ninety
countries---strengthened ties between Kew and gardens around the world,
ties that had been loosening since their colonial binds were no longer
controlling the flow of plants. The new alliance offered three crucial
incentives: (1) funding to make new collections in partner organization
countries; (2) technology and training in the "correct" ways of
collecting, sorting, cleaning, shipping, and organizing collections; and
(3) access to the MSB vault in England as a space to store a duplicate
of each new accession as a back-up collection. The spirit of partnership
that underpins these offers and incentives to gardens and other
flora-focused organizations in former colonies should not, however, be
confused for altruism; it can be more accurately characterized as a form
of paternalism. Each of the incentives links current practices of seed
collection and banking to the forms of patronage and credit offered in
the past to sustain the colonial botanic chains (Endersby 2008).

Damien Wrigley is the national coordinator of the Australian Seed Bank
Partnership (ABSP), an institution created to consolidate Australian
interests and efforts in seed banking across botanic gardens. Damien
explained that between 2002 and 2010, as seed banking was picking up
steam in the larger gardens, the only guidance they received was from
Kew.^7^ Since negotiating agreements between each of the banks was
rather cumbersome, Kew's leadership suggested to the Australian
government the creation of a partnership across the gardens pertaining
specifically to their frozen collections; they already have a super
organization for botanical gardens called the Council of Heads of
Australian Botanic Gardens. Aligned with Kew's strategic scientific
plan, this partnership could be the focal point for the negotiations of
access to seeds for safeguarding in the MSB's vault. In 2011 the newly
formed partnership created their own business plan (ABSP 2011) that
formalized the network of nine seed banks and three related
organizations, in their own words, "bridging the gap between policy
makers, researchers, seed collectors and on-ground conservation and
restoration activities" (ABSP, n.d.). Reinvigorating the impetus to
collect, thicken, and redistribute (Parry 2004) is a newfound rationale
that takes for granted that "seed banks provide a future-proof insurance
policy for Australia's unique flora, which is especially important in
times of environmental stress" (ABSP, n.d.). This strategy works in two
specific ways. First, the rhetorical power of threat and risk from
unknowable future perils are mobilized to legitimize practices that have
been ever-present in the history of the colonial project. By prefiguring
the hazards of the future, the insurability of flora becomes a question
of survival for all. The quickening pace of the climate emergency adds
gravity to the need for expediency. Stalling this project with tedious
bureaucracy is tantamount to inviting death not just for some but for
the whole nation and indeed all of humanity. Second, using the
Australian uniqueness of Australia's flora to motivate the united front
of the partnership conveniently effaces the question of Indigenous
custodianship. Making natureculture national conforms to the sovereign
ownership clause of the CBD (1992, 4) and justifies the exploitation of
Indigenous people and land for a national cause. Consequentially, the
responsibility for safeguarding native flora becomes a patriotic
imperative for all Australians, irrespective of traditional relationship
to country.^8^

Since the establishment of the Australian partnership, which was
designed primarily to smoothly reconnect the continent's flora to Kew,
collection has proceeded along the guidelines set forth in the *ASBP
Business Plan* (2011). The plan prioritizes the collection of plants
that are endangered, endemic, and economically significant. In our
interview, Damien confessed that the third criteria for selection was
the one about which he felt least secure because the knowledge of the
uses of "wild" Australian plants is, in his words, "missing."^9^ When
pushed to consider the Indigenous relations that generated this
knowledge, he capitulated to a tired but prevalent argument that through
the centuries of forced alienation from the land, newly recognized
traditional owners of the Indigenous plants of Australia might
themselves be alienated from the traditional knowledge of their
ancestors, and that only science could rediscover utility in the flora
of Australia. Each seed bank conducts collecting expeditions with
funding, training, and protocols of collection from Kew, and in return
the banks send a duplicate set of accessioned seeds to the MSB. Each
bank uploads information gathered with each collection to a national
registry that does not afford flexibility in terms data fields, so even
if there were Indigenous knowledge, there is no place for it in the
systems of data that accompany the journeying seeds.

As Parry has shown, the reduction in public funding to institutions like
gardens, museums, and university departments of plant sciences has
forced them to entreat alternative sources of funding just to continue
to employ their staff (2004, 129). Limited by the remits of discrete
funding proposals, seed banks find themselves having to meet a majority
of their financial needs from these short-term goal-oriented contracts.
In the fiscal year 2017--2018 the ASBP received funding from the Kew for
four grant-funded projects, some of which had been going on for five
years, totaling nearly \$430,000, which amounted to 87 percent of their
total income (ASBP 2019). The next year, the funding period being over,
no new funds were received, and the income of the ASBP shrank to just
over \$3,500. However, since the projects were not yet completed and
promises to funders could not be broken for fear of future
repercussions, the partnership incurred a deficit of \$212,000.
Fortunately, unspent funds from the previous year could cover the
expenses, but what about the future of the Australian collections?
Missing from the promise of long-term security of seed banks is funding
to provide care for the future lives of the humans, seeds, and databases
that come together to form the seed bank world. The need to create
back-up collections at the MSB is therefore a result of their denial of
long-term funding to partners who facilitate collection and house local
collections.

### Breaking the Fertility Chains

The precarious and sporadic funding model is not unique to the
Australian seed banks (Kloppenburg 2004, 42--44). The competitive and
piecemeal style also describes the funding model for large seed banks,
including the MSB Partnership (Lewis‐Jones 2019). How can the commitment
to reinvigorating fertile botanic chains be understood within this logic
of scarcity? Over coffee, under the shade of a flowerless jacaranda at
the University of Queensland, experienced agrobotanist Bruce Pengelly
shared his feelings about the abject future of seeds in cold storage in
Australia.^10^ Bruce was the curator of the Australian Tropical Crops
and Forages Genetic Resources Centre for nearly twenty years, and in his
retirement from institutional employ conducts reviews of seed bank
facilities around the world. Bruce lamented the unpredictability and
discontinuities in funding for securing collections of frozen seeds,
denouncing "novelty" and "changing the world" as determining factors in
the eyes of those who controlled the funds. He said, "We are forced as a
genetic resource community to go for these one-year, two-year grants,
and then move on to the next one. After thirty years of doing that, *it
doesn't work*! You are living on the minimum: it's like feeding people
to stay alive and not to grow. So all you are doing is just staying
there." After pausing for effect, Bruce concluded, "There has to be a
time where you say *stop!*" Bruce thumped his fist on the coffee table,
sending cups clattering and startling a nearby ibis that was hoping to
scavenge the last piece of carrot cake from my plate.

I, too, was taken aback but was unsurprised by Bruce's fervor and anger.
Plant scientists often get excited and animated when it comes to saving
seeds, and Bruce's poignant portrayal of the slow violence of letting
collections die through neglect brought another example of the effects
of the piecemeal funding model (Nixon 2011). Bruce agreed with my
observation that there always seems to be funding for making new
collections but not for the maintenance of what has already been stored.
Having argued in front of committees at the state and federal level,
Bruce corroborated my suspicion that the gendered care work that is
required to have any confidence in the viability of long-term storage is
unsupported because it fails the litmus test of immediate results.
Securing seeds for the long haul is exactly that: slow, long and,
ideally, boring. Friese (2013) provides helpful language to understand
the vagaries of funding that prioritizes "spectacular science," that
gathers public attention and provides newsworthy success stories, as
opposed to "basic science," which promises nothing more than the
continuation of slow, incremental, and unremarkable achievements. What
surprised me was Bruce's solution for resolving this conundrum. He went
as far as saying, "if we can't work \[funding\] out in the next five
years, we need to make the decision to *burn it!*" (emphasis mine). And
just in case I had not fully grasped the gravity of his proposal, he
banged his fist on the table again. This time I laughed, sure that he
was joking. But after the people on the nearby table threw me nervous
glances, I realized that he was deadly serious. Noticing that he had
piqued my interest, Bruce explained that the strategy of at least
threatening to destroy entire collections could be the only hope to
mobilize long-term funding. I asked what would happen if his bluff was
called, but he was resolute: curators would finally have a definitive
answer. For Bruce, letting collections slowly die from neglect was far
worse than the quick death of incineration. The indignity of having to
beg for funding to maintain what to him is a priceless collection
betrays shortsightedness in biopolitical governance.

Perhaps this most violent action of irrevocably severing the botanic
chain by incineration is not the only option. Could the plants instead
be "rematriated" to the communities from whence they came?^11^ Charlotte
Kroløkke (2018) writes about how body parts considered waste to some but
useful to others provide insight into how power in ART is distributed
along national and institutional lines. Risa Cromer uses the example of
remaindered embryos that are being "saved" by removing them from the
freezer; she suggests that relegation to the freezer is not
automatically what people mean when they intend for a collection to be
saved (Cromer 2018). What if, rather than incineration, "saving" meant
to thaw and release back into a natureculture that was willing to
reintroduce the seeds to soil?

To Bruce and other administrators of "genetic resources," a nexus of
scarcity and loss amplifies the value in the collections. Many seeds in
cold storage across Australian facilities cannot be re-collected or
repatriated because the worlds they called home no longer exist. Some of
the plants have been made extinct or come from environments that would
not be able to host them anymore. Friese (2013) thinks about whether
animals that have been brought back from extinction or "de-extincted
species" are the same as the ones that roamed the earth before the
extinction event. With the seeds there is an argument to be made that by
taking the specimens out of their "time" and "place" and suspending them
in relative isolation from their habitat, creating the conditions of
their survival that are entirely human driven, we are in fact creating
new species, albeit dependent on humans and less ecologically networked
ones. In addition, Deborah Bird Rose and Thom van Dooren (2017) offer
mourning as a praxis of coping with extinction rather than the "do
something" fervor for de-extinction. They charge us to take the
Anthropocene seriously but not pretend that we, as individuals, can do
anything about it. Extinction is already a reality. I find it helpful to
juxtapose these considerations of extinction with the ongoing struggle
to imagine and claim the survival and endurance of Indigenous people
despite the best efforts by the settler-colonial impetus to eradicate
through enduring violence and toxicity (Hoover 2017).

Seeds in frozen vaults are examples of what philosopher James Griesemer
(1990) calls "remnant models"---objects that represent living things but
are also examples of them. As material entities that are products of the
natural systems under study, these seeds are endowed with the agency to
speak for entire species of plants for which there are no "real"
counterparts. They are productive fictions representing a natureculture
that no longer exists, and the responsibility for preserving them takes
on biblical connotations. The desperate valence of this salvage project
is not an accident. At a time of political and climate turmoil, seed
banks try to leverage the fear of our own extinction into funding the
future safety of frozen seeds.^12^ The limited success of this strategy
speaks to a fundamental difference between seed banking and other forms
of cryopreservation. While some kinds of biobanking require high initial
investments in creating the facilities and securing access to the parts
of living things, once banked, the collections are considered safe and
inert (Radin 2017, 74). The seed banks are like other "germ" banks that
take for granted the expectation that the seeds in storage, once thawed
will be able to germinate, flower, pollinate, and produce new seed. All
such stock centers require constant monitoring, reproductive labor, and
testing. While protocols vary based on the seed bank, the guidelines put
forward by Kew, as used in all the seed banks for the ASBP, involve
testing samples of seeds from each accession every five years. The
monumental human labor required to test the hundreds of thousands of
accessions is ever increasing with each new deposition. Despite the
reality that each new accession to the seed bank will also require this
exponential labor investment to be secured in perpetuity, a purposeful
blindness on the part of funding bodies relegates maintenance work to
the profoundly unfundable when compared with the potential latent value
of new collections.

The final piece of the complex puzzle in Australian seed bank worlds is
the awkwardness that still remains relating to the reconciliation of
historical collections. The CBD's recasting of plants growing in
Australia, even those such as the jacaranda that were introduced by
Walter Hill, as the sovereign property of the state is a gift to
scientists in Australia. Previous botanic flows brought many plants that
have thrived in their new surroundings, creating the hybrid
natureculture of the settler state. However, a new regulation to govern
the use of seeds still maintained as latent resources threatens to
reopen colonial wounds. The Nagoya Protocol Directive on Access to
Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising
from Their Utilization, which came into force on October 12, 2014, took
on the mantle of access and benefit-sharing by making it easier to
predict the conditions for access to genetic resources from a place of
origin and by ostensibly providing a clear articulation of how these
"genetic resources" would be researched, developed, and monetized in the
future. For seed banks, the Nagoya Protocol, taken together with the
CBD, has different kinds of effects. Since the CBD has been in effect,
collecting plant material outside Australia has required adherence to
the laws of the countries of the plants' origin. However, in order to
develop or conduct research on historically banked seeds, compliance
with Nagoya depends on the interpretation of the language of the
protocol. The opinion that serves the interests of users of the
historical collections is that only materials *collected* after the date
that the protocol came into effect would be regulated rather than new
uses of historical collections. However, some countries, such as Norway
and South Africa, have taken an extended view that even new use of
historically collected materials are under the purview of the Nagoya
access and benefit-sharing scheme (Sherman and Henry 2020). This would
mean that material brought through colonial botanic chains would need to
reconnect the ties that were broken by the alienation of colonial
extraction. It remains to be seen if this will be the success in
redressing the inequalities of the past for which justice-oriented
feminist science has been yearning. Unlike for colonial botanists who
generally needed the whole plant to do anything useful, the new needs of
the biotech industry can be met by disembodied parts of living things,
such as DNA sequences. The reduction to parts of living things has a
confounding effect in the efforts to trace the origin and consequently
to rethink ownership or rights (Parry 2004, 100--01). As Parry shows,
despite the challenges and reluctance of Indigenous communities to
participate, the practice of collection has continued through changes in
the regulatory regimes (103).

Tracking the journeys of the digital fertility chains is the next
logical step of inquiry (Leonelli 2016). This tracking involves finding
the salient biological information as well as the bureaucratic traces of
permission slips, agreements, and consent forms. In Australia, the
recognition of Indigenous rights and ownership of traditional knowledge
has changed the protocols used by gardens and banks to collecting from
Indigenous territory. Nowadays, care must be taken to negotiate Access
and Benefits Sharing Agreements and Prior Informed Consent must be
received from the traditional custodians of the land before any
collection is attempted. In interviews with garden, seed bank, and
herbarium managers, it is made clear to me that that while they are
sympathetic towards past injustices towards Indigenous people, the
arranging of these agreements levies an administrative burden that they
can ill afford. The alternatives are to collect on state-owned land
where, at least in Queensland, Standard Material Transfer Agreements and
permits are de rigueur, and on private land where negotiations with
owners can be transactional. When there are workarounds that can
circumvent the need to engage in delicate relations with Indigenous
communities, the logical and fiscally prudent decision is often
non-engagement.^13^

Whether by choosing to collect on state-owned land or by partnering with
a country that has not enforced the Nagoya Protocol, botanical
collection is possible for those who can gain funding, and cleverly
avoid spaces that require burdensome paperwork. North Queensland is
again the focus of one such collection project: the search for wild
rice. A recent expedition from the University of Queensland sought to
find grasses related to rice, to better understand how they have adapted
to the hot swamps that characterize the area (Hamilton 2015). Neither
seeds nor whole plants were the aim of this collection---just
leaves---for that was all the scientists needed to characterize the
specimen's genetic relations and value. Collecting only on government
land and with the appropriate permits seemed to satisfy the researchers
ethical obligations. After all, the Nagoya Protocol has not been
ratified by Australia in part because it has not yet been determined how
the different state and local actors will interpret the historical use
clause. The idea that the land was never ceded to the state from the
Indigenous people could not be entertained because it would have
paralyzed the university's ability to continue its research. It should
not surprise me to see how easy it is for the best intentions to fall
away when threatened with inconvenience.

### Conclusion

In late 2020 my "invited invasion" to Australia ended in an anxious
flurry of COVID-19 driven diplomatic and bureaucratic actions. My visa
had expired, but I had to wait for a government repatriation flight as
the commercial flights to India had been cancelled. The upside of the
delay meant that just before I left, as a perfect bookend to my stay in
Brisbane, I got to see the jacarandas bloom again (Figure 4). In this
paper I introduced, situated, and narrated the history of a botanic
chain in which I am intertwined through my life as a postcolonial
subject, and my study of botanic gardens and seed banks. In slowing down
how these chains were created, broken, and reconnected according to
changing regimes of biopolitical control, I learn how to interpret the
language of international regulations that attempt to move in the
direction of recognizing Indigenous knowledge, traditional ownership,
while at the same time, take on goals of "biodiversity conservation." I
have argued that many seed banks are not equipped to care for seeds in
the long term (let alone the immediate future). Instead, seeds in vaults
carry the necropolitics of slowly dying due to lack of long-term funding
for their care, echoing the ongoing colonial violence and neglect
endured by the Indigenous people from whose land the plants were, and
continue to be, extracted. Juxtaposing examples from my fieldwork with
seed bank carers and the art of Fiona Foley (Badtjala, Fraser Island), I
have shown some similarities and differences between the global
fertility chains that pertain to human and botanic reproductive
histories and futures. While valuation and commodification are easily
achieved with regards to plants, questions of future and historic
ownership and control are fraught spaces of dispute and agitation. I
clarified some attempts being made to address the unequal distribution
of power in the collection and commodification of plants through a
platform of distributing justice. But as I have shown in the previous
section, workarounds and loopholes allow extractive business-as-usual to
continue unhampered. To slow down is construed, at best, as an annoying
hindrance to the progress of science and, at worst, as a denial of the
crisis of climate change and food (in)security.

![This photograph is also from below the canopy of a jacaranda in bloom,
looking directly upwards. The main stem of the tree connecting to the
ground is visible but the ground is not in frame. The branches of the
jacaranda extend outwards from the central stem but we do not see their
end points.](media/image5.jpg){width="5.625in" height="7.5in"}

Figure 4: Under the jacaranda, 2020 (Photo by author)

### Notes

^1^ Turrbal is the Aboriginal Australian language and also the name of
the people who are the traditional custodians of the region that
comprises present-day Brisbane, Australia. The place, Meanjin, is also
interchangeably used to refer to the people.

^2^ For an example of the interoperability of plant parts from around
the world for the purpose of controlling the political economy of
plants, see Saraiva 2019*.*

^3^ Cromer, Hardin, and Nyssa (2020) write about how "saving" as an
ideal is cropping up in a diversity of spaces of concern.

^4^ Nine acres was a lot of space to be governing and £500 was a sizable
fund. For reference, in 1941, the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew was fifteen
acres and its director, William Hooker, received an annual salary of
£300.

^5^ I am cognizant of my privilege in having been "invited" to live and
work in this place when as recently as 2013 over 10,000 asylum seekers
were incarcerated in detention facilities, on and off shore in
Australia. As of November24, 2021, there were 1,440 people in detention
facilities (see Refugee Council of Australia 2021).

^6^ For a more thorough explanation of the purported savagery of
Indigenous people, see Pandian 2009.

^7^ This section is based on interviews and correspondence with Damien
Wrigley conducted in 2020.

^8^ There is a stark contrast here between the way that Indigenous food
sovereignty is enacted and envisioned in the settler colonies of
Australia versus the United States. Whereas foods collectively
understood as being "originally" from the Americas are hugely successful
and a major part of the food ways of the whole world (think of corn,
tomatoes, potatoes, etc.), Indigenous Australian foods are valorized for
their yet undiscovered potential (think of the Kakadu plum and wild
rice).

^9^ Susannah Chapman reminds me that this paper could be rethought
through Sara Ahmed's *What's the Use?* (2019) and particularly the
statement, "The more a path is used, the more a path is used" (41). The
history of botanic collection is an example of a process that, despite
all the myriad threats, violence, alienation, and difficulty, continues
to happen because it continues to happen. I am grateful for this
provocation.

^10^ This section is based on interviews and correspondence with Bruce
Pengelly conducted in 2020.

^11^ Inspired by Elizabeth Hoover, I use the term *rematriated* rather
than *repatriated* to imagine how the former signifies connection,
nurture, and home for the seeds rather than the valence of ownership,
patrimony, and patrilineality that the latter implies. For the return of
human body parts to their originary places, see Jardine, Kowal, and
Bangham 2019; Cromer, Hardin, and Nyssa 2020.

^12^ There is a striking similarity between this salvage doctrine and
the efforts made to collect Indigenous blood referenced in Radin 2017.

^13^ As I prepared this manuscript, changes have taken place in
Queensland's legislation pertaining to the Nagoya Protocol. In response
to the CBD, Queensland's Parliament passed the Biodiscovery Act 2004,
which streamlined the process of extraction of living material
considered useful to industry, "to encourage the development, in the
State, of value added biodiscovery; and to ensure the State, for the
benefit of all persons in the State, obtains a fair and equitable share
in the benefits of biodiscovery." On August 11, 2020, the Queensland
Parliament passed the Biodiscovery and Other Legislation Amendment Act
2020 to amend the Biodiscovery Act 2004, including in the amendment a
traditional knowledge obligation that "requires that a person takes all
reasonable and practical steps to only use traditional knowledge for
biodiscovery with the agreement of the custodian of the knowledge."
While this may satisfy the benefit sharing and informed consent
stipulation of the Nagoya Protocol, if I have learned anything from the
history of botanic chains, it is that the logic of capital gain and the
lure of state, national, or global benefits will set the benchmark for
what may be considered "reasonable and practical steps" in obtaining
agreement from Indigenous people at the lowest possible level. But then,
I am a feminist killjoy.

### References

Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897 and
1901 (Queensland, Australia).
[[https://www.foundingdocs.gov.au/item-sdid-54.html]{.underline}](https://www.foundingdocs.gov.au/item-sdid-54.html).

Ahmed, Sara. 2019. *What's the Use?: On the Uses of Use.* Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.

Australian Seed Bank Partnership (ASBP). 2011. *Australian Seed Bank
Partnership Business Plan 2011--20*.
[[https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/2014-01-29-ASBP_BusinessPlan2011-2020_Revised.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/2014-01-29-ASBP_BusinessPlan2011-2020_Revised.pdf).

---------. 2019. *Annual Report 2018--19*.
[[https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/ASBP_AnnualReport2018-19_FINAL_300120.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/ASBP_AnnualReport2018-19_FINAL_300120.pdf).

---------. n.d. "About Us." Australian Seed Bank Partnership website.
November 8, 2020.
[[https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/about-us/]{.underline}](https://www.seedpartnership.org.au/about-us/).

BBC. 2015. "Johnny Depp's Dogs Face Death in Australia." May 14, 2015.
[[https://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-32732313#:\~:text=Actor%20Johnny%20Depp%20has%20been,by%20private%20jet%20last%20month]{.underline}](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-32732313#:~:text=Actor%20Johnny%20Depp%20has%20been,by%20private%20jet%20last%20month).

Blaser, Mario, and Marisol de la Cadena. 2018. "Pluriverse: Proposals
for a World of Many Worlds." In *A World of Many Worlds*, edited by
Mario Blaser and Marisol de la Cadena, 1--22. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Bleichmar, Daniela. 2012. *Visible Empire: Botanical Expeditions and
Visual Culture in the Hispanic Enlightenment*. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Cardozo, Karen, and Banu Subramaniam. 2013. "Assembling Asian/American
Naturecultures: Orientalism and Invited Invasions." *Journal of Asian
American Studies* 16 (1): 1--23.
[[https://doi.org/10.1353/jaas.2013.0006]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1353/jaas.2013.0006).

Chacko, Xan. 2018. "When Life Gives You Lemons: Frank Meyer, Authority,
and Credit in Early Twentieth-century Plant Hunting." *History of
Science* 56 (4): 432--69.
[[https://doi.org/10.1177/0073275318784124]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1177/0073275318784124).

---------. 2019a. "Creative Practices of Care: The Subjectivity, Agency,
and Affective Labor of Preparing Seeds for Long‐term Banking." *Culture,
Agriculture, Food and Environment* 41 (2): 97-106.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12237]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12237).

---------. 2019b. "Digging up Colonial Roots: The Less-Known Origins of
the Millennium Seed Bank Partnership." *Catalyst: Feminism, Theory,
Technoscience* 5 (2): 1--9. [[https://doi.org/
10.28968/cftt.v5i2.31947]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v5i2.31947).

Chapman, Susannah, and Paul Heald. 2020. "Agrobiodiversity Loss and the
Construction of Regulatory Frameworks for Crop Germplasm." In
*Environmental Resilience and Food Law: Agrobiodiversity and
Agroecology,* edited by Gabriella Steierand and Alberto Giulio Cianci,
159--82. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

Convention On Biological Diversity. 1992.
[[https://www.cbd.int/doc/handbook/cbd-hb-01-en.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.cbd.int/doc/handbook/cbd-hb-01-en.pdf).

Cromer, Risa. 2018. "Saving Embryos in Stem Cell Science and Embryo
Adoption." *New Genetics and Society* 37 (4): 362--86.
[[https://doi.org/10.1080/14636778.2018.1546574]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1080/14636778.2018.1546574).

---------. 2019. "Racial Politics of Frozen Embryo Personhood in the US
Antiabortion Movement." *Transforming Anthropology* 27 (1): 22--36.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/traa.12145]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/traa.12145).

Cromer, Risa, Jessica Hardin, and Zoe Nyssa. 2020. "Reckoning with
Saving." *Journal for the Anthropology of North America* 23 (1): 67--69.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/nad.12126>.

Curry, Helen Anne. 2017. "From Working Collections to the World
Germplasm Project: Agricultural Modernization and Genetic Conservation
at the Rockefeller Foundation." *History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences* 39 (2): article 5.
[[https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40656-017-0131-8]{.underline}](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40656-017-0131-8).

Endersby, Jim. 2001. "'From Having No Herbarium': Local Knowledge versus
Metropolitan Expertise: Joseph Hooker\'s Australasian Correspondence
with William Colenso and Ronald Gunn." *Pacific Science* 55 (4):
343--58.
[[https://doi.org/10.1353/psc.2001.0032]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1353/psc.2001.0032).

---------. 2008. *Imperial Nature: Joseph Hooker and the Practices of
Victorian Science*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Environmental Weeds of Australia. 2016. "*Jacaranda mimosifolia.*"
Accessed December 9, 2021.
[[https://keyserver.lucidcentral.org/weeds/data/media/Html/jacaranda_mimosifolia.htm]{.underline}](https://keyserver.lucidcentral.org/weeds/data/media/Html/jacaranda_mimosifolia.htm).

Evans, Raymond. 2007. *A History of Queensland*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Fenzi, Marianna, and Christophe Bonneuil. 2016. "From 'Genetic
Resources' to 'Ecosystems Services': A Century of Science and Global
Policies for Crop Diversity Conservation." *Culture, Agriculture, Food
and Environment* 38 (2): 72--83.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12072]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12072).

Foley, Fiona. 2020. *Biting the Clouds: A Badtjala Perspective on the
Aboriginals Protection and Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act, 1897*.
Brisbane: University of Queensland Press.

Foucault, Michel. 2003. *Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the
Collège de France, 1975--1976*. Translated by David Macey. New York:
Picador.

Frankel, Otto Herberg. 1970. "Genetic Conservation in Perspective." In
Otto H. Frankel and Erna Bennett, eds. *Genetic Resources in Plants:
Their Exploration and Conservation* (IBP Handbook no. 11) (pp.
469--489). Oxford: Blackwell.

Franklin, Sarah. 2007. *Dolly Mixtures: The Remaking of Genealogy*.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Friese, Carrie. 2013. *Cloning Wild Life: Zoos, Captivity, and the
Future of Endangered Animals*. New York: NYU Press.

Griesemer, James. 1990. "Modeling in the Museum: On the Role of Remnant
Models in the Work of Joseph Grinnell." *Biology and Philosophy* 5 (1):
3--36.
[[https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02423831]{.underline}](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF02423831).

Grove, Robert. 1996. *Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical
Island Edens and the Origins of Environmentalism, 1600--1860*.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hamilton, Lisa. 2015. "Uncharted." *The* *California Sunday Magazine*,
September 6, 2015.
<https://story.californiasunday.com/australia-rice-uncharted/>.

Haraway, Donna J. 1999. *How Like a Leaf: An Interview with Thyrza
Nichols Goodeve*. New York: Routledge.

Harrison, Rodney. 2017. "Freezing Seeds and Making Futures:
Endangerment, Hope, Security, and Time in Agrobiodiversity Conservation
Practices." *Culture, Agriculture, Food and Environment* 39 (2): 80--89.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12096]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12096).

Hayden, Cori. 2003. *When Nature Goes Public: The Making and Unmaking of
Bioprospecting in Mexico*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Hoover, Elizabeth. 2017. *The River Is in Us: Fighting Toxics in a
Mohawk Community*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Josh Lerner. 2006. *Innovation and Its Discontents:
How Our Broken Patent System Is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and
What to Do about It*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Jardine, Boris, Emma Kowal, and Jenny Bangham. 2019. "How Collections
End: Objects, Meaning and Loss in Laboratories and Museums." *BJSH
Themes,* no. 4, 1--27.
[[https://doi.org/10.1017/bjt.2019.8]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1017/bjt.2019.8).

*Journal of the Kew Guild*. 1904. "Walter Hill Obituary," 206--07.
London: Kew Publishing.

Kauanui, J. Kēhaulani. 2016. "'A Structure, Not an Event': Settler
Colonialism and Enduring Indigeneity." *Lateral* 5 (1).
[[https://doi.org/10.25158/L5.1.7]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.25158/L5.1.7).

Kloppenburg, Jack R. 2004. *First the Seed: The Political Economy of
Plant Biotechnology.* Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Kidd, Rosyln. 1997. *The Way We Civilize: Aboriginal Affairs ---The
Untold Story*. Brisbane: University of Queensland Press.

Kroløkke, Charlotte. 2018. *Global Fluids: The Cultural Politics of
Reproductive Waste and Value*. New York: Berghahn Books.

Langton, Marcia. 2016. "Botanists, Aborigines and Native Plants on the
Queensland Frontier." In *Land and Language in Cape York Peninsula and
the Gulf Country*, edited by Jean-Christophe Verstraete and Diane
Hafner, 221--40. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Leonelli, Sabina. 2016. *Data-Centric Biology: A Philosophical Study.*
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lewis‐Jones, Kay E. 2019. "'The First Step Is to Bring It into Our
Hands': Wild Seed Conservation, the Stewardship of Species Survival, and
Gardening the Anthropocene at the Millennium Seed Bank Partnership."
*Culture, Agriculture, Food and Environment* 41 (2): 107--16.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12238]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12238).

Mbembe, Achille. 2019. *Necropolitics*. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

Müller-Wille, Staffan. 2005. "Walnuts at Hudson Bay, Coral Reefs in
Gotland: The Colonialism of Linnaean Botany." In *Colonial Botany:
Science, Commerce, and Politics in the Early Modern World,* edited by
Londa Schiebinger and Claudia Swan, 34--48. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.

Nahman, Michal. 2008. "Nodes of Desire: Romanian Egg Sellers, 'Dignity'
and Feminist Alliances in Transnational Ova Exchanges." *European
Journal of Women's Studies* 15 (2): 65--82.
[[https://doi.org/10.1177/1350506807088068]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1177/1350506807088068).

Newman, Susan, and Michal Nahman.2020. "Nurture Commodified? An
Investigation into Commercial Human Milk Supply Chains." *Review of
International Political Economy*.
[[https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2020.1864757]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2020.1864757).

Nixon, Rob. 2011. *Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor.*
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

O'Gorman, Emily and Thom van Dooren. 2017. "The Promises of Pests:
Wildlife in Agricultural Landscapes ." *Australian Zoologist* 39 (1):
81--4.
[[https://doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2016.023]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2016.023).

Osborne, Michael. A. 2000. "Acclimatizing the World: A History of the
Paradigmatic Colonial Science." *Osiris* 15 (1): 135--51.
[[https://doi.org/10.1086/649323]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1086/649323).

Osseo-Asare, Abena. D. 2014. *Bitter Roots: The Search for Healing
Plants in Africa*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Pandian, Anand. 2009. *Crooked Stalks: Cultivating Virtue in South
India*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Parry, Bronwyn. 2004. *Trading the Genome: Investigating the
Commodification of Bio-information*. New York: Columbia University
Press.

Pascoe, Bruce. 2014. *Dark Emu Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident?*
Broome, WA: Magabala Books.

Peres, Sara. 2019. "Seed Banking as Cryopower: A Cryopolitical Account
of the Work of the International Board of Plant Genetic Resources,
1973--1984." *Culture, Agriculture, Food and Environment* 41 (2):
76--86.
[[https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12236]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12236).

Radin, Joanna. 2017. *Life on Ice: A History of New Uses for Cold
Blood.* Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Refugee Council of Australia. 2021. *Statistics on People in Detention
in Australia Surrey Hills*. November 24, 2021.
[[https://www.refugeecouncil.org.au/detention-australia-statistics/2/]{.underline}](https://www.refugeecouncil.org.au/detention-australia-statistics/2/).

Rose, Deborah Bird, and Thom van Dooren. 2017. "Keeping Faith with the
Dead: Mourning and De-extinction" *Australian Zoologist* 38 (3):
375--78.
[[https://doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2014.048]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2014.048).

Saraiva, Tiago. 2019. "California Cloning in French Algeria: Rooting
Pieds Noirs and Uprooting Fellahs in the Orange Groves of the Mitidja."
In *How Knowledge Moves: Writing the Transnational History of Science
and Technology*, edited by John Krige, 95--119. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Schaffer, Simon, Lissa Roberts, Kapil Raj, and James Delbourgo, eds.
2009. *The Brokered World: Go-Betweens and Global Intelligence,
1770*--*1820.* Sagamore Beach, MA: Science History Publications.

Schiebinger, Londa. 2009. *Plants and Empire.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Schiebinger, Londa, and Claudia Swan, eds. 2007. *Colonial Botany:
Science, Commerce, and Politics in the Early Modern World*.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Sherman, Brad, and Robert J. Henry. 2020. "The Nagoya Protocol and
Historical Collections of Plants." *Nature Plants* 6 (5): 430--32.
[[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-020-0657-8]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-020-0657-8).

Stengers, Isabelle. 2005. "A Cosmopolitical Proposal." In *Making Things
Public: Atmospheres of Democracy*, edited by Bruno Latour and Peter
Weibel, 994--1003. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Stoler, Ann Laura. 2016. *Duress: Imperial Durabilities in Our Times.*
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Straight, Kerry. 2017. "Irreplaceable Plant Specimens From France
Destroyed in Australian Quarantine Blunder." ABC News, May 8, 2017.
[[https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-08/irreplaceable-plant-specimens-destroyed-by-biosecurity-officers/8504944]{.underline}](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-08/irreplaceable-plant-specimens-destroyed-by-biosecurity-officers/8504944).

Temporary Activity (subclass 408) visa. 2018. Personal Document from the
Australian Government Department of Home Affairs. 1--4.

Vertommen, Sigrid, Vincenzo Pavone, and Michal Nahman. 2021. "Global
Fertility Chains: An Integrative Political Economy Approach to
Understanding the Reproductive Bioeconomy." *Science, Technology, &
Human Values* 47 (1): 1--34.
[[https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243921996460]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243921996460).

Wolfe, Patrick. 1994. ''Nation and MiscegeNation: Discursive Continuity
in the Post-Mabo Era.'' *Social Analysis* 36 (October): 93--152.

---------. 2006. "Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the
Native." *Journal of Genocide Research* 8 (4): 387--409.

### Author Bio

**Xan Sarah Chacko** is Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow in Women's and Gender
Studies at Wellesley College. Her current book, *The Last Seed: Botanic
Futures in Colonial Legacies* explores the history and practices of
frozen seed banking.
