#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  Thinking Post-developmental Pedagogies with Physical Activity Pedagogical Resources---Or, How Might We Entangle Pedagogies and Physiological Knowledges Differently?

Nicole Land

School of Early Childhood Studies, Ryerson University

nland@ryerson.ca

### 

### Abstract

Thinking with a Canadian physical activity pedagogical resource, this
article proposes that post-developmental early childhood education
pedagogies can engage with physiological sciences beyond the instructive
or instrumental relationships currently facilitated by contemporary
physical activity pedagogies. To begin, I bring feminist science studies
together with post-developmental pedagogies to detail how pedagogy and
physiology become intertwined. I trace the tensions of weaving
physiological knowledges with pedagogies, acknowledging the power-laden
complexities of thinking with Euro-Western sciences in Canadian
education. Finally, I work through two propositions aimed at making
physiological knowledges differently entangled with the complexities of
post-developmental pedagogies: (1) crafting physiological knowledges as
a problem with pedagogies, while (2) deploying these physiological
knowledges as pedagogical provocations that call us to engage
differently with physiological knowledges.

### Keywords 

Post-developmental pedagogies, physiological knowledges, feminist
science studies, physical education

### Introduction

This article proposes that post-developmental early childhood education
pedagogies can engage with physiological sciences in an effort to
unsettle the hegemonic stability of predominant physical activity
pedagogies that are underpinned by scientific epistemologies. I organize
my argument in two primary movements that echo the intentions of early
childhood education post-developmental pedagogies to both trace existing
educational trajectories (the beginning section) and orient toward
inventing speculative, situated responses to complex worlds (the
concluding section) (Nxumalo, Vintimilla, and Nelson 2018; Vintimilla
and Pacini-Ketchabaw 2020). I situate this paper within the context of
thinking with post-developmental pedagogies (Land 2020; Land et al.
2020; Pacini-Ketchabaw, Kind, and Kocher 2016), which are pedagogies
that propose relations that engage with children beyond the linear, age-
and stage-based, normalizing logics of child development (Burman 2016;
Moss 2016; Pacini-Ketchabaw, Nxumalo, Kocher, Elliot and Sanchez 2015)
in Canadian early childhood education. I do this because early childhood
education is a space where scientific knowledges entangle with
pedagogical practices through various concerns, including, for example,
health, nutrition, and physical activity. Further, because
post-developmental pedagogies work to resist the universalizing,
instrumental tendencies of developmental theories by offering situated,
local, tentative responses to inherited educational structures, I focus
on one physiology-informed curricular resource relevant to early
childhood education in Canada. Throughout the article, my central
argument is that taking physiological knowledges to account with
post-developmental pedagogies entangles physiology with the ethical and
political concerns of post-developmental early childhood education, thus
working physiological knowledges to account with pedagogical questions,
tensions, and answerabilities that complexify the epistemic structures
that typically govern scientific knowledges in early childhood
education. I hope that the propositions this article offers will open
space for generating locally meaningful experiments in weaving
pedagogies with physiologies differently in other contexts.

I begin by discussing how physiology, as a powerful Euro-Western
knowledge, perpetuates colonial epistemic hierarchies and maintains
neoliberal conceptions of normative, individualized "health." Digging
into how physiological sciences, practices of mainstream physical
education, and early childhood education pedagogies become entangled in
contemporary Euro-Western worlds, I turn to a Canadian physical activity
pedagogical resource, the *Canadian 24-Hour Movement Guidelines for
Children and Youth developed by the* Healthy Active Living and Obesity
Group (HALO) of the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO)
Research Institute, the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (CSEP),
ParticipACTION, The Conference Board of Canada, and the Public Health
Agency of Canada. While each organization provides public access to
these Guidelines (hereafter referred to as "the *Guidelines*"), in this
article I will refer to the version of the *Guidelines* shared on the
Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology website (2016a). The
*Guidelines* function as a document created for educators,
professionals, and guardians that shares information on the intensity,
type, and duration of physical activity recommended for children. I
trace how physiology and pedagogy become intertwined in this resource
and detail how these physiology-pedagogy entanglements enable specific
educational practices.

In the second part of the article, I put forward one attempt at working
a physiological knowledge---excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (or
EPOC)---differently with early childhood education pedagogies. Briefly,
excess post-exercise oxygen consumption is an exercise science theory
that alleges that once a bout of exercise is complete, a human body
continues to "burn" calories to restore the body to its original resting
state. Following Angela Willey, a feminist science studies scholar, I
formulate a partial "vision of what it might look like to politicize
scientific knowledge production in a way that allows for an
answerability, an accountability, beyond the realm of internal critique
that science as we know it lacks" (2016, 14). I think with EPOC as one
physiological knowledge that underpins the *Canadian 24-Hour Movement
Guidelines for Children and Youth*. Translating Willey's (2016)
proposition into early childhood education, early childhood education
pedagogies can engage, think, and ask questions *with* EPOC beyond the
interpretative or instrumental frames that typically inform how
pedagogies and physiology converse. I work through two propositions that
bring post-developmental pedagogies and physiological knowledges
together in an unfamiliar way: (1) crafting physiological knowledges as
a problem with pedagogies, while (2) deploying these physiological
knowledges as pedagogical provocations that might create different
possibilities for engaging with physiological knowledges in early
childhood education. Throughout this article, I make the necessary
contractions of my work public, as I detail my situated, small
intervention into how specific physiological knowledges become entangled
with specific pedagogical practices in Euro-Western Canada. I want to
imagine an educational practice where we (those who actively participate
in pedagogies: researchers, educators, children, families) make
physiology differently answerable to the multiple critiques that nourish
post-developmental education while creating differently accountable
practices of relating with physiological knowledges.

### Physiology and Pedagogies: CSEP's Movement Guidelines for Children and Youth

Pedagogical resources that tout physical activity recommendations,
outline physical literacy programming, and detail the necessity of
educating young children in healthy nutrition habits are increasingly
prevalent in Canadian early childhood education. These include the
*Canadian 24-Hour Movement Guidelines for Children* *and Youth* (CSEP,
2016a), *Healthy Opportunities for Preschoolers* by Temple and Preece
(2007), and *Healthy Beginnings for Preschoolers 2--5* from the Chronic
Disease Prevention Alliance of Canada (n.d.). The *Guidelines* contain
four core recommendations: sweat, step, sleep, and sit. Related to
physical activity, the sweat guideline outlines how long children should
be highly active ("an accumulation of at least 60 minutes per day of
moderate to vigorous physical activity" \[2\]), while the step category
details additional required physical activity ("several hours of a
variety of structured and unstructured light physical activities"
\[2\]). The guidelines note that children and youth should follow these
recommendations "for optimal health benefits" (2). Targeted toward
younger children, CSEP's *Physical Activity Guidelines for the Early
Years* (n.d.) detail physical activity recommendations for toddlers,
setting the developmentally rooted groundwork for the *Guidelines'*
prescriptions for moderate to vigorous physical activity by recommending
"progression toward at least 60 minutes of energetic play by 5 years of
age" (para. 1). The intended audience for the *Guidelines* includes
educators, practitioners, and guardians. Rooted in a developmental
perspective of childhood, where growth and skill development are
assessed against a "healthy" or "typical" norm and are universalizable
across various children's bodies, the *Guidelines* are intended to
provide a reference for early childhood curriculum and policy. While
none of these documents explicitly refer to EPOC in their public-facing
literature, the assertion that EPOC is desirable and happens in concert
with vigorous (high energy, demanding) exercise (or play) is one of the
many physiological knowledges that underpins these guidelines.

### Detailing Physiology as a Euro-Western Knowledge

Physiology---as one knowledge production apparatus of Euro-Western
settler colonial epistemic hegemony (Haraway and Subramaniam 2021; Lyons
et al. 2017; McKittrick 2021; Roy and Subramaniam 2016; Sanabria 2016;
TallBear 2013; Willey 2016)---is the science of how a living body
functions. I think with physiology in this article because it is a core
knowledge that informs mainstream physical education pedagogy. As a
Euro-Western knowledge system, physiology sustains a specific scheme of
bodied regulation. Physiology is utilized to dictate criteria for
normative and legitimate bodied subjectivity, which translates into
governmental constructions of citizenship and personhood, which can be
achieved through individualized predictable, quantifiable behaviors
(Guthman 2013; Herndon 2005; Kendrick 2011). Physiology often matters as
a tool of governance, owing to histories and present inheritances of
settler colonialism that perpetuate Euro-Western beliefs about knowledge
hierarchies as they create ranking systems that place (what is
uncontestably understood to be) rational, objective scientific
knowledges as the most contemporary, leading-edge form of knowledge.
Historically, this "true" knowledge of physiology was utilized to govern
bodies and subjectivities, as ethnographic methods grounded in
physiological "truths" informed how Indigenous, Black, brown, Asian,
disabled, queer, and lower-class bodies were classified as aberrant,
unhealthy, unintelligent, and in need of intervention or control (Briggs
2003; Fausto-Sterling 2000; Haraway 1990; Harding 1994, 2016). Such a
history is not over; physiology and the body heralded by mainstream
science remain a mechanism of structural governance.

While an exhaustive survey of the myriad methods that physiology
utilizes as a tool of centering Euro-Western knowledges and
subjectivities is beyond the scope of this article, taking inspiration
from many outlines of how science unfurls itself as a technique of
governance (Haraway 2013; Harding 2006; LeBesco 2011; Whitt 2009), a
summary would proceed as follows: physiology functions amid truth-driven
ontologies by making biochemical agencies and flesh visible in
strategic, quantifiable ways (for example, lean muscle mass), which are
then classified as normative or pathological based on Euro-Western
state-endorsed understandings of race, health, function, and disease
(lean = healthy), which then translates into socially sanctioned
criteria for subjecthood and bodied legitimacy (people with lean bodies
are desirable citizens). These ongoing familiar, but differently lived,
arrangements of knowledge, bodies, pathologization, individuation, and
desirability create a recursive system, where physiology makes visible a
biochemical mechanism or measure as consequential (lean muscle mass),
thus sustaining the need for physiological inquiry in order to ensure
the optimal normative functioning of said mechanism (we need to fully
understand lean muscle mass physiologically, to ensure more people can
work toward gaining lean muscle mass).

In Canada, Euro-Western epistemological traditions, physiology, and
other structures that center whiteness as normative overlap to enact
settler colonial oppressions targeting Indigenous and minoritized
communities (Allan and Smylie 2015; Reading and Wien 2013; Smylie and
Firestone 2015). This leads to a multitude of physiology-validated (and
sustaining) intrusions, including interventions promoting "healthy"
physical activity, which act as thinly veiled tools of reasserting
settler valuations of bodied legitimacy, desirability, and citizenship
(Rice 2016; Russell, 2020; Ward, Beausoliel, and Heath 2017).
Physiological evaluations of "healthy" or "ideal" bodies position (male,
physically able) white settler bodies as a "normative" benchmark. This
supposed ideal designates non-"normal" bodies as less legitimate and
less desirable, thus lending a science-based rationale to the historical
and ongoing systemic oppression---murder, genocide, slavery,
sterilization, relocation, erasure, program and funding
disparities---faced by Indigenous Peoples, immigrants, refugees, and
people of color. Physiology has been utilized to abstract ancestry to
blood quantum, to rob reproductive agency based on skin color, and to
maintain the validity of race-based genetic predispositions to what is
perceived as moral failing or bodied weakness, such as epidemiological
ethnic vulnerability to obesity, anemia, or substance use. In the
particular context of thinking childhoods, physiology intersects with
child development to dictate "healthy" trajectories of growth and to
shape children's relations with their bodies toward achieving an "ideal"
normative body (Burrows and Wright 2007). This is why thinking with how
we engage physiology in the context of Canadian early childhood
education matters: physiology is a non-innocent knowledge with highly
impactful lived consequences.

One site where these consequences of physiology become lived in
education is in physical activity or movement curriculum. As McKay,
Gore, and Kirk (2012) argue, physical education resources increasingly
integrate scientific insights in an attempt to legitimize physical
activity teaching as "valid" amid colonial constructions of scholarly
knowledge, thus centering the Euro-Western scientific knowledge that
holds great power and ubiquity. Azzarito et al. (2017) contend that
physical education curriculum obscures the complexities of moving bodies
by ensuring that "specific bodies and identities in relation to the
health discourse are normalized, celebrated, and legitimized in
pedagogical settings (i.e., school PE) through many acts of
reinforcement and reiteration" (2016, 7). Particular to Canadian early
childhood education, physical activity pedagogical resources, including
the *Guidelines*, enact the political consequences of physiology through
their reiteration of a particular, normalizing response to the question,
Who can the child be? Burrows and Wright (2020), following Harwood
(2009), name these classed, gendered, ableist reiterations as
biopedagogies: the pedagogical contours given to (normative,
developmental, non-innocent) scientific knowledges as they become
enacted in the name of health in education. The *Guidelines* participate
in these reiterations as they center neoliberal conceptions of children
as future citizens, personal responsibility, bodied legitimacy, and
quantifiable educational attainment (Dahlberg and Moss 2004), and as
declarations that early childhood education pedagogies must teach
children the skills they need to be healthy or pedagogies that promote
fundamental movement skills and fitness are crucial for children's
healthy development become wrapped in affirmations of morality, care,
and teleological learning that make them risky to contest. For example,
the CSEP (2016b) accompaniment to the *Guidelines* purports that
reaching the recommended sixty minutes of activity can help children
"improve their health," "maintain a healthy body weight," "do better in
school," "feel happier," and "have fun playing with friends" (para. 13).
These professed benefits invest in dominant developmental Euro-Western
narratives of childhood as a period where children gain the skills they
need to become successful and valued citizens within a neoliberal state
(Azzarito 2009; Rich 2011). In turn, the guidelines strategically
delimit the possibilities for thinking physical activity pedagogically
because pedagogies must properly teach physical activity in order to
produce healthy children.

When physical education pedagogical resources are made indisputable by
the assumed validity and efficacy of science-informed information, the
background knowledges and practices that sustain their unquestionability
are recursively bolstered. Complex material-discursive enactments (Barad
2007) of health, fitness, children, and teaching are framed as fixed,
true, and common educational touchstones. The vast, lively, and deeply
contestable knowledge-generating practices that underlie these
pedagogies, including the physiological sciences that bolster mainstream
conceptions of health and fitness, cannot easily become an accessible or
worthy concern for pedagogical practice (Land and Danis 2016; Petherick
and Beausoleil 2016; Rich 2011). If posed, questions of why children
should participate in prescribed physical activities are answered with a
gesture toward evidence-based research, coupled with an assumption that
the ontological supremacy of the scientific canon negates any critical
impulse.

#### Concealing How Physiology Entangles with Pedagogies

By curating the foundational features of physical activity pedagogies
that can become subject to pedagogical purview, dominant physical
education pedagogies ensure their educational authority and secure the
dominance of settler-colonial onto-epistemological paradigms. When
pedagogical resources are framed as well-founded and incontestable
dictates ("optimal health benefits" can be achieved by following the
*Guidelines*), debating the (physiological, ontological, ethical)
principles that underpin their content becomes unnecessary. This
constructed certainty, whereby it is the curriculum, recommendation, or
practice and not the composition of that curricular formation that is
made to be perceptible, in turn, brackets the possibilities for
critically engaging these pedagogies. Foundational investigations and
the scientific knowledges they produce are silently woven through the
guidelines. Gestures in the form of citations are made to background
studies but each study's particular conceptualizations, assumptions,
borders, outcomes, and affordances are not centered beyond their
utilization as evidence toward the veracity of the *Guidelines.* While
perhaps enacted in the name of (patronizing) accessibility, any overt
attention to making public the epistemological mechanisms that give the
*Guidelines* the gravity they are habituated to assume is not present
(ex: Timmons, Naylor, and Pfeiffer 2007; Tremblay, Shephard, and Brawley
2007). In highlighting this making invisible (or, making untouchable) of
the messy, imperfect, lively bioscientific knowledges that underpin many
predominant physical education and movement teaching approaches, I am
focusing on how physiological sciences are not put at risk, and
especially not beyond the conventional tools science employs to critique
itself (validity, reliability, methodology), in how pedagogical
resources typically engage with physiology.

There are a multitude of very important human-centered social justice
critiques that make visible how these pedagogies are complicit in race,
gender, fat, ability, and socioeconomic privilege-based oppression
(Azzarito, 2009; Dagkas and Hunter 2015; Flintoff, Dowling, and
Fitzgerald 2015; Hylton 2015). For example, Laura Azzarito (2009)
details how high school physical education pedagogies systematically
perpetuate gendered and racialized constructions of ideal "fit" and
"healthy" bodies. Douglas and Halas (2013) outline how post-secondary
institutions center white, Euro-Western physical education researchers,
which translates into a wealth of knowledge built of white, Euro-Western
epistemologies, ontologies, and research biases. Analyzing physical
education curriculum, Flintoff, Dowling, and Fitzgerald (2015) trace how
curriculum policies conceal white privilege and Euro-Western knowledges
into seemingly universalized, normative discourses of health and
fitness. These are very important critiques. With my more explicit focus
on complexifying physiology-pedagogy entanglements, I want to emphasize
that by making only certain human-centered concerns accessible for
critique, current methods for integrating physiology with pedagogies
strategically conceal other contestable features of these pedagogies.
This delimits the pedagogical possibilities for thinking movement,
muscles, fitness, fat, and physiology critically and creatively.

What if we foreground the foundational onto-epistemological assumptions,
practices, and knowledges that underpin physical activity pedagogies?
The violent histories of decisions justified by science, the
Euro-Western epistemological hierarchies that position science as
objective or universalizable, the contemporary structures that produce
and are produced by science as dominant knowledge---what happens when we
commit to engaging science as a practice of both inheriting and hoping
with pedagogies? Willey proposes that "when we claim sciences, instead
of 'engaging' them, the terrain shifts from one of how un/friendly
feminists are to Science to one of what a world of sciences has to
offer, where so much is at stake" (2016, 146). Reading Willey's argument
with early childhood education pedagogies, to do the work of "claiming"
sciences proposes that, in our pedagogical work, we might engage
differently (tending to knowledge politics, ethics, consequences) with
physiological knowledges, and contest science's onto-epistemological
projects, by intentionally noticing physiological knowledges as a lively
pedagogical participant. I propose that refusing to let scientific
assumptions hide behind physical education pedagogical resources might
become a method for claiming, infiltrating, and taking to account how
physiological knowledges entangle in problematic and productive ways
with early childhood education pedagogies.

The *Guidelines* do not, in the form distributed to practitioners, make
clear the physiology that serves as the foundation for the
recommendations. While it should be noted that the *Guideline
Development Report for the Canadian 24-Hour Movement Guidelines for
Children and Youth* by CSEP (2016b) is mentioned once in the preamble,
in the *Guideline*s points like "an accumulation of at least 60 minutes
per day of moderate to vigorous physical activity" (2) are abstracted
from the scientific customs that materialize their perceptibility. If
the messiness behind this understanding of movement is concealed, the
vulnerabilities it might hold are also made irrelevant to pedagogical
concern. This allows for certain questions to become possible: Who
decides what counts as energetic play? How does this assessment devalue
other forms of movement? How are gender, sex, race, ability, body size,
access, and other power disparities addressed or perpetuated when
"moderate to vigorous" physical activity is recommended? While these
questions are critical and important, the *Guidelines* make differently
complex questions less accessible: What scientific practices facilitate
this temporal frame of sixty minutes? What physiological conceptions
make this "vigorous" intensity matter, and how do these metabolic
activities become imbricated in meaning-making practices? What ways of
getting to know movement are made imperceptible by the epistemic power
afforded to physiology? If I do put stock in a recommendation for
moderate to vigorous physical activity, how might the physiological
foundations of this recommendation---and the knowledges, bodies, and
consequences they engender---mesh with my pedagogical intentions?

#### Intervening with/in Physiology 

Taking physiology to account with pedagogies, I confront singular,
authoritative, and non-complex/complexifiable assertions of dominant
physiological sciences as they matter in pedagogical resources and work
to engage these knowledges beyond their claims to certainty. This
article is certainly not the only project intervening with/in
physiology. Feminist interventions in Euro-Western science on an
ontological level take up the practices of contemporary sciences (Barad
2007; Frost 2016; Mol 2002; Roy 2007; Youdell 2017), arguing that
science dis/invites critical engagements with interdisciplinary
knowledges that unsettle the seemingly-unquestionable interpretative
inevitability that Euro-Western sciences have come to bank on -- and
make bank from (Haraway 2016; Kirby 2013 McKittrick 2021; Roy 2018;
Stengers 2010; Wilson 2015). There are modes of living physiologies that
refuse to lend physiology or the Euro-Western ontologies it compels a
single breath Stengers 2011): Métis scholar Zoe Todd (2014) examines
human-fish relationships to detail how fish can be engaged within
expansive relational frameworks lived by Indigenous Peoples in Arctic
Canada; Banu Subramaniam (2014) writes with flowers, tracing how her
practices of plant physiology intertwine with different disciplines and
gendered dynamics across India and America; vaginas are a site of
Kanien\'keha:ka refusal with Emily Coon (2020), who thinks flesh beyond
colonial gendered narratives of reproduction; and Kim TallBear (2013)
theorizes genomic knowledges with Indigenous sciences and
relationalities. From the biosciences come a multitude of feminist
methodologies of doing science otherwise: tracing metabolisms (Landecker
2011, 2013); heart feminism (Pollock 2015); thinking fetal development
as transdisciplinary relationality (Yoshizawa 2016); and imagining
epigenetics as obesity entanglements (Warin et al. 2015). Physiologists
craft publications that contradict what the field once took to be true,
troubling the underpinnings of the field they have pledged to sustain.
Feminist art interventions refigure what it is to live fleshed lives
when physiology matters, as, for example, Sabrina Benaim (2017) writes
poems made in the traffic of serotonin that animates her depression.

As I work to rethink how early childhood education pedagogies can engage
with physiology, I can know, and this article can take up, some of these
interventions in physiology. Other alternative possibilities for
physiologies, flesh, and life remain necessarily imperceptible to my
work. I take this unevenly perceptible critical engagement as a
making-real of Willey's plea to "recognize the importance of
proliferating sciences (and not consolidating epistemic authority) to
anti-imperial projects of worlding" (2016, 145). Without grandiose
claims, I offer my work up to other projects that critique science from
a variety of ontological, epistemological, and methodological places,
with the hope of working alongside them in this massive project of
unsettling colonial hegemonies of Euro-Western science.

### Post-Developmental Pedagogies and Physiological Knowledges

Following from critical reconceptualist early years scholarship that has
extricated pedagogy from universalized scientific evidence-based
prescription (Cannella 1997; Dahlberg, Moss, and Pence 2013; Kessler and
Swadener 1992; MacNaughton 2000), post-developmental early childhood
education orients toward pedagogies concerned with urgently inheriting
the present complexities of contemporary worlds with children (Blaise
2013; Taguchi 2011; Rautio and Jokinen 2015; Pacini-Ketchabaw and Blaise
2021; Taylor and Pacini-Ketchabaw 2015). Post-developmental
conceptualizations of childhood begin from an appreciation of how
stage-based theories of development, which claim that children reach
adulthood through a series of universalized developmental milestones,
privilege Euro-Western ontological and epistemological systems (Burman
2016; Dahlberg and Moss 2004; MacNaughton 2003). By constructing both
childhood and development as common, linear, predictable, and stable
experiences, scholars concerned with creating post-developmental
pedagogies argue that Euro-Western developmental theories allow for
precisely targeted education practices, which service settler colonial
conceptions of citizenship, individualized responsibility, and
productivity (Land et al. 2020; Pacini-Ketchabaw, Nxumalo, and Rowan
2014; Pacini-Ketchabaw and Taylor 2015). Alternative understandings of
childhood or education are devalued and silenced by developmental
narratives (Blaise, 2014), which, in a global and settler colonial
context, leads to the imposition of Euro-Western "normative"
expectations of childhood upon diverse children (Blaise 2005; Cannella
and Viruru 2004; Nxumalo and Adair 2019).

Post-developmental pedagogies contend that education, childhood, and
development are ongoing and plural, and made through different
practices, epistemologies, and ontologies (Blaise, Hamm, and Iorio 2017;
Pacini-Ketchabaw, Kind, and Kocher 2016; Rautio 2013). The
post-developmental theorizing that I draw upon positions education as a
specifically politicized, non-anthropocentric and humanism-refusing
endeavor (Iorio et al. 2017; Nxumalo 2018; Olsson 2012; Taylor 2020). In
contrast to the stable human-centered conceptions of education
facilitated by developmentalism, post-developmental scholars maintain
that pedagogy, childhood, bodies, and learning unfold with a multitude
of human, material, and more-than-human actants (Land and Todorovic,
2020; MacRae 2019; Nelson, Pacini-Ketchabaw, and Nxumalo 2018;
Pacini-Ketchabaw, Kind, and Kocher 2016; Rautio 2017). Postdevelopmental
scholars dissolve developmental constructions of gender (Blaise 2005),
literacy (Nxumalo 2017), movement (Hackett and Rautio 2019), neurons
(Taguchi 2016), everyday scientific concepts such as force (de Frietas
and Palmer 2016), and individualized responsibility (Taylor 2017) into
complex, entangled, intentional, always ongoing pedagogical
negotiations---living knowledges (Vintimilla, Pacini-Ketchabaw, and Land
2021)---composed and responded with in situated collisions of children,
adults, and place-based actants.

Physiology, and the physiological knowledges that enable developmental
logics, can serve as rich sites of intervention for post-developmental
pedagogies. Bringing post-developmental pedagogies' insights toward my
discussion of how physiology and pedagogies do, and might, become
entangled, I argue that predominant relationships between physiology and
pedagogies, such as those in the *Guidelines*, can be reconfigured. When
universalized physical activity recommendations lose their utility
because the developmental assumptions underpinning them are made, to
borrow from Haraway (2016), unthinkable, then inherited physiological
knowledges do not need to be buried under taken-for-granted curricula
and sciences do not need to be ascribed the explanatory power they are
accustomed to.

#### Doing Physiological Knowledges with Post-developmental Pedagogies

I experiment with two propositions for bringing physiological knowledges
and pedagogies into unfamiliar, critical conversation: (1) taking
physiological knowledges as a problem *with* pedagogy; while (2)
generating pedagogical propositions wherein pedagogies might engage
differently with physiological knowledges. I begin by detailing a
physiological knowledge that participates in recommendations for
physical activity intensity, excess post-exercise oxygen consumption
(EPOC). I think with EPOC as a resource, selected due to its insidious
presence in many physical activity guidelines, including the *Canadian
24-Hour Movement Guidelines for Children and Youth*. I do not claim that
EPOC is the only or the most important physiological knowledge that
participates in the *Guidelines* ---it is one physiological knowledge
that matters. Further, EPOC as a physiological knowledge is quite
interesting to grapple with pedagogically, as it raises questions of
temporality, exchange, and debt.

#### Meeting EPOC

"Oxygen debt," "after burn," and "raised metabolism" are some of the
names EPOC colloquially introduces itself with. EPOC is a loyal product
of exercise physiology and is dedicated to theories of movement that
understand biochemical energy as a system of carefully regulated and
bounded consumption, exchange, and production. EPOC logics, alongside
many other physiological knowledges, lurk beneath recommendations for
moderate to vigorous physical activity intensity. Oxygen debt needs to
be earned, EPOC will tell us, by vigorous physical activity; it is the
result of exercise work to exhaustion, muscled work that taxes aerobic
energy systems and dips into anaerobic reserves when we feel our lungs
scream (Børsheim and Bahr 2003; DeLorey, Kowalchuk, and Paterson 2003).
The harder you work, the more EPOC you can earn (Crommett and Kinzey
2004; LaForgia, Withers, and Gore 2006; Yano, Yunoki, and Ogata 2003).
When we work our bodies via contracting our muscles, EPOC knows that we
utilize metabolic substrates at the site of muscle contraction to the
point of depletion, that lactate is generated as a by-product of muscled
work, and that body temperature spikes as an outcome of our
effort---and, that these disturbances must be righted to maintain
equilibrium, to restore homeostasis (McArdle, Katch, and Katch 2006).
EPOC realizes itself as the period where these disruptions are righted,
where although our body has stalled its intentional, bounded bout of
vigorous physical activity, a tremendous amount of oxygen is required to
re-craft muscular energy stores, to oxidize lactate, and to compensate
for an increased body temperature. Here is where EPOC plays its hero
card: this post-exercise oxygen deficit, this need to shuttle oxygen
throughout the body to repair cells and replenish energy stores even
after you finish exercising, also taxes the body---it dips into fat
stores and burns calories after you have ceased purposeful physical
activity (Dorado, Sanchis-Moysi, and Calbet 2004; Gaesser and Brooks
1984). And EPOC might posit, isn't burning bonus calories an interesting
wrinkle in the quest to treat obesity and promote health and fitness?

#### EPOC as a Problem *with* Pedagogy

To pose physiological knowledges as a problem with post-developmental
pedagogies, I invoke a specific conception of what it is to problematize
or what it means to take as a problem. *How* might I make EPOC a problem
with post-developmental pedagogies? I understand that post-developmental
pedagogies are always a practice, a labor, a doing (Hodgins 2014;
Pacini-Ketchabaw, Kind, and Kocher 2016; Taylor 2017). Stengers, a
feminist science studies scholar, emphasizes that "connections are
something that must be created...this is the only way of succeeding in
creating problems rather than receiving them readymade" (2008, 9).
Bringing Stengers together with post-developmental pedagogies, I
make---enact, deploy, do---pedagogies with/in my intentional practices
of creating EPOC as a problem with post-developmental pedagogies.
Importantly, I do not want to create problems for the sake of problems.
I need to generate "problems that are not to be solved but problems that
need a different response" (St. Pierre, Jackson, and Mazzei 2016,
105)---problems that, as Stengers stresses "give to the situation the
power to make us think" (2005, 185). I need to generate knotted problems
that cut across the ontological disjunctures of physiological knowledges
and post-developmental pedagogies, and that reconfigure how
post-developmental pedagogies can engage with physiological knowledges.

##### Pedagogical problems of response with EPOC

EPOC engenders a logic of response: the harder an agential human
exercises their muscles, the greater the demand on metabolic resources
within muscles, more resources are consumed and must be regenerated, and
thus a greater EPOC is created. I might see this as an EPOC physiology
of response, one loyal to a physiological knowledge of dose-response
relationships (Altshuler 1981). EPOC as response enacts a physiological
knowledge where stimuli interject in a body in a specific dose and the
body then responds in a measured manner, predictably appropriate to the
magnitude of the stimulus. Taking response EPOC physiological knowledges
as a problem with pedagogy is to confront the ways this notion of
response cuts across pedagogical practice: How is the "response"
practiced by EPOC im/perceptible to the ways of being responsive we
nurture with pedagogies?

Returning to the *Guidelines* to generate pedagogical problems with EPOC
response logic, I need to trace the various "responses" privileged in
the pedagogy this document advances. EPOC and vigorous physical activity
use a teleological, positivist, and predictable logic of response that
captures response as a stable pattern---the harder you work, the more
EPOC you generate. EPOC, as a concept for getting to know the body,
extends into the *Guidelines* through both the recommendations made
(sixty minutes of vigorous activity a day for the most healthy bodied
response) and the pedagogical practices that the *Guidelines* profess. I
can borrow from post-developmental pedagogies that refuse a conception
of curricular interactions located in linear or predictable logic
(Olsson 2012; Pacini-Ketchabaw 2010) to take this straightforward
assumption of responsivity as a problem of being accountable for the
different modes of responding I create with pedagogy: How can I craft
pedagogies that are hospitable to, practice, and can be interrupted by
the methods and modes of responding that I value? How can I think with
modes of responding imperceptible to dominant settler-colonial
paradigms?

Post-developmental pedagogies also adopt experimental modes of
responsivity, including response-ability (Haraway 2016, thinking
collectively (Instone and Taylor 2016), (re)storying (Hodgins 2014), or
thinking diffractively (Davies 2014). Post-developmental responsivity is
not a singular bounded, stable pattern. With EPOC dose-response logic, I
can generate problems of response multiplicity: if I understand that
pedagogical interactions are non-linear, and therefore refute or
complexify the "easy" pedagogical recommendation of prescribing activity
intensity, but I do invest in EPOC as a relevant knowledge, what modes
of responding do the pedagogies I participate in make possible because
of the ways that these pedagogies expect cells, lungs, bodies, and
children to respond (differently---or similarly)? If EPOC response-logic
matters to contemporary health discourses and generating local modes of
responding with children matter, how can I take up the messy spaces
between answerability, invention, and dose-response relationships?

##### Pedagogical problems of transaction with EPOC

Transactional logic animates another EPOC physiology. EPOC is made
visible as the exchange of oxygen for the release of stored muscular
energy, as cellular metabolic substrates swap for muscular contraction
and oxygen trades back to replenish muscled energy reserves (McArdle,
Katch, and Katch 2006). EPOC as transaction begets a specific problem of
the kinds of transactions that are made perceptible with pedagogies: How
do EPOC transactions matter with pedagogical modes of exchange?

EPOC employs a transactional logic that roots children's motion, caloric
deficit, and aerobic health in a metabolic transactionality reflective
of modern economic systems---and, as Rosi Braidotti (2013) and Hannah
Landecker (2013) assert, anxieties---where physical activity is
exchanged for measurable health and development outcomes. In the
*Guidelines* and their accompaniments, this transactionality is
demonstrated in statements such as "children who get 60 minutes of
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity per day are stronger, more
confident, and less stressed" (ParticipACTION 2017). This is an easy,
straightforward transactionality that, when taken with
post-developmental pedagogies that attend to how pedagogy is ongoing
(Taguchi 2011), generates questions of transaction coherence: (How) can
I reconcile or integrate linear conceptions of bodied metabolic
transactions with an understanding of curricular exchange that is
fragmented and non-linear? What is required of my pedagogy to hold
different (or similar) conceptions of transactionality for different
scales of exchange (educator-child, cellular)? How might I think with
modes of transactionality that disrupt the assumed linearity and
commodification of exchange within Euro-Western logics?

EPOC also adopts a transactionality that confronts temporality, as it
locates caloric deficits in the future (vigorous physical activity *now*
leads to an increase in calorie-burning *later*). I can use
post-developmental pedagogies to confront this temporal imperative and
attend to the multitude of temporalities that reconfigure pedagogical
practice (Farquhar 2016; Myers 2016; Pacini-Ketchabaw and Kummen 2016).
With post-developmental practices that cultivate an attention to the
present and detail the dangers of imposing future-oriented logic upon
early childhood education (Holmes and Jones 2016; Olsson 2012; Blaise,
Hamm, and Iorio 2017), I can generate problems of transactional logic:
When pedagogies locate children's aerobic activity as a transaction that
enables future calorie burning, what kinds of movement, bodies, and
learning do these pedagogies create? How do pedagogies that are
underpinned by the metabolic consumption of calories-to-come mesh with
my pedagogical values? How does pedagogy do exchange(s) in early
childhood education?

The "how" of making EPOC a generative problem with pedagogy is always
partial and I have offered here two potential means of EPOC-problem-ing
with post-developmental pedagogies. There are, I hope, a multitude of
additional problems that EPOC poses with pedagogies, which might include
problems of homeostasis (what does the assumption of equilibrium do with
pedagogies?), agency (who makes/enacts/does EPOC?), veracity (how is
EPOC contested from within physiology?), or difference (how does EPOC do
difference?).

#### Generating Pedagogical Provocations to Think Differently with Physiological Knowledges

After working two EPOC physiological knowledges into problems with
post-developmental pedagogies, I turn toward generating pedagogical
provocations wherein pedagogies might engage differently with
physiological knowledges. Post-developmental pedagogies detail how
thinking pedagogically is the work of continually (re)crafting meaning
and meaning-making practices (Nxumalo 2017; Rautio 2017) because of the
answerabilities and accountabilities that participants in a pedagogical
entanglement demand from one another (Nxumalo, Vintimilla, and Nelson
2018). Post-developmental pedagogies are situated and responsive. They
actively refuse didactic application and universalization, but this
refusal is one of speculating, of gesturing toward what might happen
when we think with children about how to answer to our inheritances,
debts, and relations in the name of living well together. This parallels
Haraway (1988, 2016) and Willey's (2016) concern with the ethical
accountabilities of scientific knowledge production and echoes
Stengers's contention that "the 'how' is a question which exposes, which
puts at risk, those who are obliged.... \[and\] only these people can
take the risk of putting experimental change into the formulation of
their obligations, because only they are exposed by the question" (2005,
192). In the context of the pedagogical work I am proposing, these
feminist science studies insights mean that generating pedagogical
provocations is a question of answerability because different bodies are
differently accountable to different problems, provocations, and
pedagogies. Post-developmental pedagogies act on these accountabilities
by creating pedagogical spaces, questions, and conditions that demand
that those involved in the unfolding of a pedagogy confront the tensions
and imperfections that tug at the borders of that pedagogy (Early
Childhood Pedagogies Collaboratory, n.d.). Provocations intentionally
put ideas, knowledges, people, and practices at risk because of how
these actants entangle with the pedagogies that underpin or animate a
provocation. I want to craft provocations that draw physiological
knowledges into differently answerable partial pedagogical
entanglements; into questions that demand we think carefully about how
we might engage with physiological knowledges and pedagogies in order to
create different tensions and openings for re-inventing how physiologies
and post-developmental pedagogies can entangle in ways that activate our
pedagogical intentions, politics, and ethics.

##### Pedagogical provocations of responsivity

In taking EPOC response physiological knowledges as a problem for
pedagogies, I wondered how EPOC might spawn problems of responsivity
with pedagogy: How is the "response" practiced by EPOC im/perceptible to
the responsivenesses of pedagogy*?* With post-developmental pedagogies,
which make a habit of problematizing discourses that allow for the easy
translation of one state/knowledge/practice into another in planned,
bounded, and future-oriented ways, I can remind EPOC of the violences
inherent in such linearity: When we understand our flesh or pedagogies
as predictably responsive, what possibilities for pedagogy are made
possible? This is a *provocation of wondering the responsivities that
animate pedagogies*, of tracing multiple modes of co-extensive
relational response and entanglement. What happens when I intentionally
attend to how responding/responses happen in the education spaces I
participate in? How do Euro-Western conceptions of response entangle
with my pedagogical habits in both obvious and inadvertent ways? Where
do physiological or EPOC notions of dose-response logic interject in my,
and children's, movements, engagements with flesh, or other methods of
responding---and how might I, or do I, want to confront these methods of
responding? This might work to unsettle EPOC certainties and make
visible the tensions in trying to contain possible modes of response
that interject in early childhood education practice.

Returning to the *Guidelines*, ParticipACTION (2016) shares a package of
resources designed for educators to utilize with children as they
incorporate the *Guidelines* into their daily activities). These include
coloring pages, matching games, and a certificate of achievement, which
intend to evoke a specific kind of pedagogical response. As a
pedagogical provocation that takes up the problems that predictable
pedagogical response-logics make with pedagogies, I wonder how these
resources might make visible non-linear, non-human-centered methods of
responding: How can these resources be engaged pedagogically while
intentionally decentering the belief that these resources draw a
predictable, universalizable, or controllable response from the children
and other participants/materials/agencies that engage with these? How
else can we *respond with* coloring pages, complexifying the responses
that these resources assume? How might different material analyses,
ontologies of "health," epistemologies of education, diverse lived
experiences, or constructions of childhood generate different
possibilities for responding with these normative resources? Perhaps
this provocation might upset the bounded, curated responsivity that
these resources enact, and make predictable response-logic visible as
only one potential method of responding with/in post-developmental
physical activity pedagogies.

##### Pedagogical provocations of transactionality

Posing EPOC's transactional logic as a problem with pedagogy, I asked
how EPOC transactions might matter with pedagogical modes of exchange*.*
Thinking with post-developmental pedagogies, I can take up the
im/perceptibility of economic/metabolic transactional logic, tracing
where this logic emerges in children's everyday engagements and where it
intrudes into encounters. This is *a provocation of attending to
transactions*, of making visible how the specific exchange-mode of EPOC
physiological knowledges might contradict post-developmental
pedagogies-informed methods of exchange. EPOC articulates an ethic of
exchange grounded in a specific future-oriented temporality. With
post-developmental pedagogies, I can ask what might be required to frame
flesh as in pursuit of a future utopic ("healthy") state---what must be
possible for EPOC and the *Guidelines* to locate physical activity amid
a futurities framework? Post-developmental pedagogies oriented toward
productivity (Taguchi, Palmer, and Gustafsson 2016; Pacini-Ketchabaw,
Kind, and Kocher 2016) lend resources for asking what the ethical
implications of centering a physiological knowledge that creates oxygen
deficits to burn future calories might be: this is a *provocation of
complexifying how, or if, movement matters as a transaction*. The
resources for educators (ParticipACTION 2016) detail sixty "sweat"
activities that educators can use to promote sweaty vigorous physical
activity, including "chase a fairy," "run from zombies," "shoot hoops,"
"sword fight a pirate," "chase the boys," "escape prison," and "chase
the girls." From pedagogies that take movement as unpredictably
generative (Jackson 2016; Manning 2014; Rotas 2015), I know that
movement does far more than displace a body in space or fulfill
recommendations for physical activity. I wonder how these suggested
"sweat" activities might be engaged for the "transactions" they invite.
What if I intentionally do not conceptualize these movement activities
within a vigorous physical activity/EPOC frame of transaction, and
instead follow how these activities generate exchange(s) that do or do
not mesh with my pedagogical intentions? Perhaps this provocation might
hold to account the idea of moving as propagating oxygen absences or
promoting normative health, while opening space to trace how debts,
surpluses, exchanges, and transactionalities are made, multiply and
momentarily, with post-developmental pedagogies.

### Towards a *Why* for Doing Physiological Knowledges Differently with Pedagogies

In mainstream early childhood education in Canada, physiology often
matters as physical activity guidelines, nutrition recommendations, and
normative developmental dictates. This is not to say that physiology is
a special site of engagement or governance or resistance in early
childhood education, only that it is a force that demands to be reckoned
with. I have argued that post-developmental pedagogies can work
physiological knowledges toward a complex pedagogical answerability and
I have explored one possible strategy for how pedagogies can confront
the physiological knowledges that matter to early childhood education.
My practice of crafting problems with pedagogies while deploying
provocations aimed at demanding a different answerability of
physiological knowledges is always partial, necessarily contestable, and
vulnerable to both unsettling and re-centering the dominant forms of
knowledge I work to complexify.

Echoing Stengers, I believe that we need pedagogical innovations that
take up physiological knowledge(s) "as it diverges, that is, feeling its
borders, experimenting with the questions which practitioners may accept
as relevant, even if they are not their own questions" (2005, 184).
Taking physiological knowledges to account with post-developmental
pedagogies exposes physiology to the critical terrain of
post-developmental early childhood education, thus working physiological
knowledges to account with pedagogical concerns, innovations, and
answerabilities that differ from the benchmarks that sciences are
typically held to in settler-colonial education spaces. Within much
larger, incredibly diverse projects of dismantling the dominance of
colonial epistemologies, perhaps weaving physiological knowledges with
post-developmental pedagogies might function as an imperfect and
situated intervention toward unsettling dominant hierarchies of
scientific knowledge while confronting some governing practices of
making flesh perceptible in early childhood education.

### References

Altshuler, Bernard. 1981. "Modeling of Dose-Response
Relationships." *Environmental Health Perspectives* 42: 23--27.
<https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.814223>.

Azzarito, Laura. 2009. "The Panopticon of Physical Education: Pretty,
Active and Ideally White." *Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy* 14
(1): 19--39. <https://doi.org/10.1080/17408980701712106>.

Azzarito, Laura, Doune Macdonald, Symeon Dagkas, and Jennifer Fisette.
2017. "Revitalizing the Physical Education Social-Justice Agenda in the
Global Era: Where Do We Go from Here?" *Quest* 69 (2): 205--219.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.2016.1176935>.

Barad, Karen. 2007. *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and
the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

Benaim, Sabrina. 2017. *Depression and Other Magic Tricks.* Button
Poetry.

Blaise, Mindy. 2005. "A Feminist Poststructuralist Study of Children
'Doing' Gender in an Urban Kindergarten Classroom." *Early Childhood
Research Quarterly* 20 (1): 85--108.
<http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2005.01.002>.

---------. 2013. "Activating Micropolitical Practices in the Early
Years: (Re)assembling Bodies and Participant Observations." In *Deleuze
and Research Methodologies*, edited by Rebecca Coleman and Jessica
Ringrose, 184--200. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

---------. 2014. "Interfering with Gendered Development: A Timely
Intervention." *International Journal of Early Childhood* 46 (3):
317--26. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13158-014-0122-9>.

Blaise, Mindy, Catherine Hamm, and Jeanne Marie Iorio. 2017. "Modest
Witness(ing) and Lively Stories: Paying Attention to Matters of Concern
in Early Childhood." *Pedagogy, Culture, & Society* 25 (1): 1--12.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/14681366.2016.1208265>.

Børsheim, Elisabet, and Roald Bahr. 2003. "Effect of Exercise Intensity,
Duration and Mode on Post-Exercise Oxygen Consumption." *Sports
Medicine* 33 (14): 1037--1060.
<https://doi.org/10.2165/00007256-200333140-00002>.

Braidotti, Rosi. 2013. *The Posthuman.* Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

Briggs, Laura. 2003. *Reproducing Empire: Race, Sex, Science, and US
Imperialism in Puerto Rico*. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Burman, Erica. 2016. *Deconstructing Developmental Psychology*. 3rd ed.
London: Routledge.

Burrows, Lisette, and Jan Wright. 2007. "Prescribing Practices: Shaping
Healthy Children in Schools." *International Journal of Children\'s
Rights* 15 (1): 83--98. <http://doi.org/10.1163/092755607X181685>.

---------. 2020. "Biopedagogies and Family Life: A Social Class
Perspective." In *Social Theory and Health Education*, edited by Deana
Leahy, Katie Fitzpatrick, and Jan Wright, 19--32. London: Routledge.

Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology. n.d. *Canadian Physical
Activity Guidelines for the Early Years*. Ottawa: Canadian Society for
Exercise Physiology.

Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology. 2016a. *Canadian 24-Hour
Movement Guidelines for Children and Youth*. Ottawa: Canadian Society
for Exercise Physiology.

---------. 2016b. *Guideline Development Report for the Canadian 24-Hour
Movement Guidelines for Children and Youth*. Ottawa: Canadian Society
for Exercise Physiology.

Cannella, Gaile Sloan. 1997. *Deconstructing Early Childhood Education:
Social Justice and Revolution*. New York: Peter Lang.

Cannella, Gaile Sloan, and Radhika Viruru. 2004. *Childhood and
Postcolonization: Power, Education, and Contemporary Practice*. New
York: RoutledgeFalmer.

Chronic Disease Prevention Alliance of Canada. n.d. *Collaborative
Action on Childhood Obesity, Phase 2: Healthy Beginnings for
Preschoolers 2--5*. Ottawa: Chronic Disease Prevention Alliance of
Canada.

Coon, Emily. 2020. "Oh Nisa'taro:ten? Learning How to Sken:nen as a
Contemporary Haudenosaunee Woman." MA thesis, University of Victoria.
<https://dspace.library.uvic.ca/handle/1828/11529>.

Crommett, April D., and Stephen J. Kinzey. 2004. "Excess Postexercise
Oxygen Consumption Following Acute Aerobic and Resistance Exercise in
Women Who are Lean or Obese." *The Journal of Strength & Conditioning
Research* 18 (3): 410--415.
<https://journals.lww.com/nsca-jscr/Fulltext/2004/08000/Excess_Postexercise_Oxygen_Consumption_Following.3.aspx>.

Dagkas, Symeon, and Lisa Hunter. 2015. "'Racialised' Pedagogic Practices
Influencing Young Muslims\' Physical Culture." *Physical Education and
Sport Pedagogy* 20 (5): 547--558.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17408989.2015.1048210>.

Dahlberg, Gunilla, and Peter Moss. 2004. *Ethics and Politics in Early
Childhood Education*. New York: Routledge.

Dahlberg, Gunilla, Peter Moss, and Alan Pence. 2013. *Beyond Quality in
Early Childhood Education and Care: Languages of Evaluation*. 3rd ed.
London: Routledge.

Davies, Bronwyn. 2014. "Reading Anger in Early Childhood Intra-Actions:
A Diffractive Analysis." *Qualitative Inquiry* 20 (6): 734--741.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800414530256](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1077800414530256).

de Freitas, Elizabeth, and Anna Palmer. 2016. "How Scientific Concepts
Come to Matter in Early Childhood Curriculum: Rethinking the Concept of
Force." *Culture Studies of Science Education,* 11: 1201--22.
<http://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-014-9652-6>.

DeLorey, Darren S., John M. Kowalchuk, and Donald H. Paterson. 2003.
"Relationship Between Pulmonary O2 Uptake Kinetics and Muscle
Deoxygenation During Moderate-Intensity Exercise." *Journal of Applied
Physiology* 95 (1): 113--120.
<https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00956.2002>.

Dorado, Cecilia, Joaquin Sanchis-Moysi, and José AL Calbet. 2004.
\"Effects of Recovery Mode on Performance, O2 Uptake, and O2 Deficit
During High-Intensity Intermittent Exercise.\" *Canadian Journal of
Applied Physiology* 29 (3): 227--244. <https://doi.org/10.1139/h04-016>.

Douglas, Delia D. 2013. "The Wages of Whiteness: Confronting the Nature
of Ivory Tower Racism and the Implications for Physical Education."
*Sport, Education and Society* 18 (4): 453--474.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13573322.2011.602395>.

Early Childhood Pedagogies Collaboratory. n.d. *Pedagogies in the
Making*. Accessed November 25, 2021.
<https://www.earlychildhoodcollaboratory.net/>.

Farquhar, Sandy. 2016. "Time in Early Childhood: Creative Possibilities
with Different Conceptions of Time." *Contemporary Issues in Early
Childhood* 17 (4): 409--420.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1463949116677925](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1463949116677925).

Fausto-Sterling, Anne. 2000. *Sexing the Body: Gender Politics and the
Construction of Sexuality*. New York: Basic Books.

Flintoff, Anne, Fiona Dowling, and Hayley Fitzgerald. 2015. "Working
Through Whiteness, Race and (anti) Racism in Physical Education Teacher
Education." *Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy* 20(5): 559--570.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17408989.2014.962017>.

Frost, Samantha. 2016. *Biocultural Creatures*. Durham, DC: Duke
University Press.

Gaesser, Glenn A., and George E A. Brooks. 1984. "Metabolic Bases of
Excess Post-Exercise Oxygen." *Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise* 16 (1): 29--43.

Guthman, Julie. 2013. "Fatuous Measures: the Artifactual Construction of
the Obesity Epidemnic." *Critical Public Health* 23 (3): 263--273.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09581596.2013.766670>.

Hackett, Abigail, and Pauliina Rautio. 2019. "Answering the World: Young
Children's Running and Rolling as More-than-Human Multimodal Meaning
Making." *International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education* 32
(8): 1019--1031. <https://doi.org/10.1080/09518398.2019.1635282>.

Haraway, Donna. 1988. "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in
Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective." *Feminist
Studies* 14 (3): 575--599. <https://doi.org/10.2307/3178066>.

---------. 1990*. Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World
of Modern Science*. New York: Routledge.

---------. 2013. *Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of
Nature*. New York: Routledge.

---------. 2016. *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the
Chthulucene*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Haraway, Donna, and Banu Subramaniam. 20201. "Donna Haraway and Banu
Subramaniam in Conversation (April 22, 2021---excerpt)." *Catalyst:
Feminism, Theory, Technoscience* 7 (2): 1--3.
<https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v7i2.37646>.

Harding, Sandra G. 1994. "Is Science Multicultural?: Challenges,
Resources, Opportunities, Uncertainties." *Configurations* 2 (2):
301--30. <http://doi.org/10.1353/con.1994.0019>.

---------. 2006. *Science and Social Inequality: Feminist and
Postcolonial Issues*. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

---------. 2016. *Whose Science? Whose Knowledge?* New York: Cornell
University Press.

Harwood, Valerie. 2009. "Theorizing Biopedagogies." In *Biopolitics and
the "Obesity Epidemic": Governing Bodies,* edited by Jan Wright and
Valerie Harwood, 15--30. New York: Routledge.

Herndon, April Michelle. 2005. "Collateral Damage from Friendly Fire?:
Race, Nation, Class and the 'War Against Obesity.'" *Social Semiotics*
15 (2): 127--141. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10350330500154634>.

Hodgins, B. Denise. 2014. "Playing with Dolls: (Re)storying Gendered
Caring Pedagogies." *International Journal of Child, Youth, and Family
Studies* 5 (4.2): 782--807.
<http://doi.org/10.18357/ijcyfs.hodginsbd.5422014>.

Holmes, Rachel, and Liz Jones. 2016. "Flickering, Spilling and Diffusing
Body/Knowledge in the Posthuman Early Years." In *Posthuman Research
Practices in Education*, edited by Carol A. Taylor and Christina Hughes,
108--27. Hampshire: Palgrave.

Hylton, Kevin. 2015. "'Race' Talk! Tensions and Contradictions in Sport
and PE." *Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy* 20 (5): 503--516.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17408989.2015.1043253>.

Instone, Lesley, and Affrica Taylor. 2016. "Thinking About Inheritance
through the Figure of the Anthropocene, from the Antipodes and in the
Presence of Others." *Environmental Humanities* 7 (1): 133--150.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3616371>.

Iorio, Jeanne Marie, Catherine Hamm, Will Parnell, and Elizabeth
Quintero. 2017. "Place, Matters of Concern, and Pedagogy: Making
Impactful Connections with our Planet." *Journal of Early Childhood
Teacher Education* 38 (2): 121--35.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/10901027.2017.1306600>.

Jackson, Alecia Youngblood. 2016. "An Ontology of a Backflip." *Cultural
Studies Critical Methodologies* 16 (2): 183--192.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1532708616634735](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1532708616634735).

Kendrick, Rachael. 2011. "The Stomach is a Grave: Epidemic Obesity and
the Metabolic Body." PhD Thesis, The University of Melbourne.
<https://minerva-access.unimelb.edu.au/handle/11343/36194>.

Kessler, Shirley, and Beth Blue Swadener, eds. 1992. *Reconceptualizing
the Early Childhood Curriculum: Beginning the Dialogue*. New York:
Teachers College Press.

Kirby, Vicki. 2013. *Quantum Anthropologies*. Duke University Press.

Laforgia, Joseph, Robert T. Withers, and Christopher John Gore. 2006.
"Effects of Exercise Intensity and Duration on the Excess Post-Exercise
Oxygen Consumption." *Journal of Sports Sciences* 24 (12): 1247--1264.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/02640410600552064>.

Land, Nicole. 2020. "Tending, Counting and Fitting with
Post-developmental Fat(s) in Early Childhood Education." *Contemporary
Issues in Early Childhood* (February), 1--16.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1463949120907383>.

Land, Nicole, and Ildikó Danis. 2016. "Movement/ing Provocations in
Early Childhood Education." *Journal of Childhood Studies* 41 (3):
26--37. <https://doi.org/10.18357/jcs.v41i3.16304>.

Land, Nicole, Cristina Delgado Vintimilla, Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw,
and Lucille Angus. 2020. "Propositions toward Educating Pedagogists:
Decentering the Child." *Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood*
(September), 1--13. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1463949120953522>.

Land, Nicole, and Sanja Todorovic. 2021. \"Getting to Know Movement
Differently: Nurturing Communicative, Relational, and Collective
Movement Pedagogies with Toddlers.\" *Journal of Early Childhood
Research* 19 (2): 239--252.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1476718X20969839](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1476718X20969839).

Landecker, Hannah. 2011. "Food as Exposure: Nutritional Epigenetics and
the New Metabolism." *BioSocieties* 6 (2): 167--194.
<https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2011.1>.

---------. 2013. "Postindustrial Metabolism: Fat Knowledge." *Public
Culture* 25 (3): 495--522. <http://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-2144625>.

LeBesco, Kathleen. 2011. "Neoliberalism, Public Health, and the Moral
Perils of Fatness." *Critical Public Health* 21 (2): 153--64.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/09581596.2010.529422>.

Lyons, Kristina, Juno Salazar Parreñas, Noah Tamarkin, Banu Subramaniam,
Lesley Green, and Tania Pérez-Bustos. 2017. "Engagements with
Decolonization and Decoloniality in and at the Interfaces of
STS." *Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience* 3 (1): 1--47.
<https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v3i1.28794>.

MacNaughton, Glenda. 2000. *Rethinking Gender in Early Childhood
Education*. Sydney: Allen and Unwin.

---------. 2003. *Shaping Early Childhood: Learners, Curriculum and
Contexts*. Berkshire: McGraw-Hill Education.

MacRae, Christina. 2019. "The Red Blanket: A Dance of Animacy." *Global
Studies of Childhood*: 1-11. <http://doi.org/10.1177/2043610619832899>.

Manning, Erin. 2014. "Wondering the World Directly---Or, How Movement
Outruns the Subject." *Body & Society* 20 (3--4): 162--88.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X14546357>.

McArdle, William D., Frank I. Katch, and Victor L. Katch. 2006.
*Essentials of Exercise Physiology*. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

McKay, Jim, Jennifer M. Gore, and David Kirk. 1990. "Beyond the Limits
of Technocratic Physical Education." *Quest* 42 (1): 52--76.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.1990.10483979>.

McKittrick, Katherine. 2021. *Dear Science and Other Stories.* Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.

Mol, Annemarie. 2002. *The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice.*
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Moss, Peter. 2016. "Why Can't We Get beyond Quality?" *Contemporary
Issues in Early Childhood* 17 (1): 8--15.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/1463949115627895>.

Myers, Casey. 2016. "Becoming 'Babies' in Real Time: Temporal Emergence
in the Classroom Mangle." *Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood* 17
(4): 421--30. <http://doi.org/10.1177/1463949116677926>.

Nelson, Narda, Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw, and Fikile Nxumalo. 2018.
"Rethinking Nature-Based Approaches in Early Childhood Education: Common
Worlding Practices." *Journal of Childhood Studies* 43 (1): 4--14.
<https://doi.org/10.18357/jcs.v43i1.18261>.

Nxumalo, Fikile. 2017. "Geotheorizing Mountain--Child Relations within
Anthropogenic Inheritances." *Children\'s Geographies* 15 (5): 558--69.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2017.1291909>.

---------. 2018. "Stories for Living on a Damaged Planet: Environmental
Education in a Preschool Classroom." *Journal of Early Childhood
Research* 16 (2): 148--59. <http://doi.org/10.1177/1476718X17715499>.

Nxumalo, Fikile, Cristina D. Vintimilla, and Narda Nelson. 2018.
"Pedagogical Gatherings in Early Childhood Education: Mapping
Interferences in Emergent Curriculum." *Curriculum Inquiry* 48 (4):
433--53. <http://doi.org/10.1080/03626784.2018.1522930>.

Nxumalo, Fikile, and Jennifer Keys Adair. 2019. "Social Justice and
Equity in Early Childhood Education." In *Handbook of early childhood
care and education,* edited by Christopher P. Brown, Mary Benson
McMullen and Nancy File, 661-682. John Wiley & Sons.

Olsson, Liselott Mariett. 2012. "Eventicizing Curriculum: Learning to
Read and Write through Becoming a Citizen of the World." *Journal of
Curriculum Theorizing* 28 (1): 88--107.
<https://journal.jctonline.org/index.php/jct/article/view/173>.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, ed. 2010. *Flows, Rhythms, and Intensities
of Early Childhood Education Curriculum*. New York: Peter Lang.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, and Mindy Blaise. 2021. "Feminist Ethicality
in Child-Animal Research: Worlding through Complex Stories."
*Children\'s Geographies*.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2021.1907311>.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, Sylvia Kind, and Laurie Kocher. 2016.
*Encounters with Materials in Early Childhood Education.* New York:
Routledge.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, and Kathleen Kummen. 2016. "Shifting
Temporal Frames in Children's Common Worlds in the Anthropocene."
*Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood* 17 (4): 431--41.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/1463949116677930>.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, Fikile Nxumalo, Laurie Kocher, Enid Elliott,
and Alejandra Sanchez. 2015. *Journeys: Complexifying Early Childhood
Practices through Pedagogical Narration*. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, Fikile Nxumalo, and Carol Rowan. 2014.
"Researching Neoliberal and Neocolonial Assemblages in Early Childhood
Education." *International Review of Qualitative Research* 7 (1):
39--57. <http://doi.org/10.1525/irqr.2014.7.1.39>.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, and Affrica Taylor, eds. 2015. *Unsettling
the Colonial Places and Spaces of Early Childhood Education*. New York:
Routledge.

Pacini-Ketchabaw, Veronica, Sylvia Kind, and Laurie LM Kocher. 2016.
*Encounters with Materials in Early Childhood Education*. Routledge.

ParticipACTION. 2016. *Benefits and Guidelines.* Accessed January 7,
2020.
<https://www.participaction.com/en-ca/benefits-and-guidelines/children-and-youth-age-5-to-17>.

ParticipACTION. 2017. *This Is Why 60 Minutes of Physical Activity
Should Be Mandatory in Schools*.

Petherick, Leanne and Natalie Beausoleil, N. 2016. "Obesity Panic, Body
Surveillance, and Pedagogy: Elementary Teachers' Response to Obesity
Messaging. *Obesity in Canada: Critical Perspectives,* edited by Jenny
Ellison, Deborah McPhail, and Wendy Mitchinson, chapter 9. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press. Google Play eBook version.

Pollock, Anne. 2015. "Heart Feminism." *Catalyst: Feminism, Theory,
Technoscience* 1 (1): 1--30. <https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v1i1.28811>.

Rautio, Pauliina. 2013. "Children Who Carry Stones in Their Pockets: On
Autotelic Material Practices in Everyday Life." *Children's Geographies*
11 (4): 394--408. <http://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2013.812278>.

---------. 2017. "Thinking about Life and Species Lines with Pietari and
Otto (and Garlic Breath)." TRACE: Finnish Journal for Human-Animal
Studies, no. 3, 94--102.
[[https://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2013.812278]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1080/14733285.2013.812278).

Rautio, Pauliina, and Päivi Jokinen. 2015. "Children's Relations to the
More-than-Human World beyond Developmental Views." In *Play and
Recreation, Health and Wellbeing*, edited by Bethan Evans and John
Horton, 35--49. Singapore: Springer.

Rice, Carla. 2016. "Revisioning Fat: From Enforcing Norms to Exploring
Possibilities Unique to Different Bodies." In *Obesity in Canada:
Critical Perspectives*, edited by Jenny Ellison, Deborah McPhail, and
Wendy Mitchinson, Chapter 16. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Google Play eBook version.

Rich, Emma. 2011. "'I See Her Being Obesed!": Public Pedagogy, Reality
Media and the Obesity Crisis." *Health* 15 (1): 3--21.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/1363459309358127>.

Rotas, Nikki. 2015. "Running Ecologies: Thinking Movement
Pedagogically." I*nflexions* 8: 185--189.
<https://www.inflexions.org/radicalpedagogy/main.html#Rotas>.

Roy, Deboleena. 2007. "Somatic Matters: Becoming Molecular in Molecular
Biology." *Rhizomes* 14 (Summer).
<http://www.rhizomes.net/issue14/roy/roy.html>.

---------. 2018. *Molecular Feminisms: Biology, Becomings, and Life in
the Lab*. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Roy, Deboleena, and Banu Subramaniam. 2016. "Matter in the Shadows."
In *Mattering*, edited by Victoria Pitts-Taylor, 23-42. New York: New
York University Press.

Russell, Constance. 2020. "Fat Pedagogy and the Disruption of
Weight-Based Oppression: Toward the Flourishing of all Bodies." In *The
Sage Handbook of Critical Pedagogies*, edited by Shirley R. Steinberg,
and Barry Down, 1516--1531. Los Angeles: Sage.

Sanabria, Emilia. 2016. "Circulating Ignorance: Complexity and
Agnogenesis in the Obesity 'Epidemic.'" *Cultural Anthropology* 31 (1):
131--58. <http://doi.org/10.14506/ca31.1.07>.

St. Pierre, Elizabeth A., Alecia Y. Jackson, and Lisa A. Mazzei. 2016.
"New Empiricisms and New Materialisms: Conditions for New Inquiry."
*Cultural Studies ↔ Critical Methodologies* 16 (2): 99--110.
[[https://doi.org/10.1177/1532708616638694]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1532708616638694).

Stengers, Isabelle. 2005. "Introductory Notes on an Ecology of
Practices." Cultural Studies Review 11 (1): 183--96.
<http://doi.org/10.5130/csr.v11i1.3459>.

---------. 2008. "History through the Middle: Between Macro and
Mesopolitics. Interview with Isabelle Stengers, Brian Massumi, and Erin
Manning." *Inflexions*, no. 3: 1--16.
<https://www.inflexions.org/n3_stengershtml.html>.

---------. 2010. *Cosmopolitics 1*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.

---------. 2011. "'Another Science Is Possible!' A Plea for Slow
Science." Presented at Université Libre de Brussels, Belgium.
<http://we.vub.ac.be/aphy/sites/default/files/stengers2011_pleaslowscience.pdf>.

Subramaniam, Banu. 2014. *Ghost Stories for Darwin: The Science of
Variation and the Politics of Diversity*. Chicago: University of
Illinois Press.

Taguchi, Hillevi Lenz. 2011. "Investigating Learning, Participation, and
Becoming in Early Childhood Practices with a Relational-materialist
Approach." *Global Studies of Childhood* 1 (1): 36--50.
<http://doi.org/10.2304/gsch.2011.1.1.36>.

---------. 2016. "'The Concept as Method': Tracing-and-Mapping the
Problem of the Neuro(n) in the Field of Education." *Cultural Studies -
Critical Methodologies* 16 (2): 213--23.
<http://doi.org/10.1177/1532708616634726>.

Taguchi, Hillevi Lenz, Anna Palmer, and Lovisa Gustafsson. 2016.
"Individuating 'Sparks' and 'Flickers' of 'a Life' in Dance Practices
with Preschoolers: The 'Monstrous Children' of Colebrook's Queer
Vitalism." *Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education* 37
(5): 705--16. <http://doi.org/10.1080/01596306.2015.1075710>.

TallBear, Kim. 2013. *Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the
False Promise of Genetic Science*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.

Taylor, Affrica. 2017. "Beyond Stewardship: Common World Pedagogies for
the Anthropocene." *Environmental Education Research* 23 (10): 1448--61.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2017.1325452>.

---------. 2020. "Countering the Conceits of the Anthropos: Scaling Down
and Researching with Minor Players." *Discourse: Studies in the Cultural
Politics of Education* 41 (3): 340--358.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01596306.2019.1583822>.

Taylor, Affrica, and Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw. 2015. "Learning with
Children, Ants, and Worms in the Anthropocene: Towards a Common World
Pedagogy of Multispecies Vulnerability." *Pedagogy, Culture, & Society*
25 (4): 507--29. <http://doi.org/10.1080/14681366.2015.1039050>.

Temple, Viviene, and Alison Preece. 2007. *Healthy Opportunities for
Preschoolers*. Vancouver, BC: Legacies Now.

Timmons, Brian W., Patti-Jean Naylor, and Karin A. Pfeiffer. 2007.
"Physical Activity for Preschool Children---How Much and How?" *Applied
Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism* 32: S122--34.
<http://doi.org/10.1139/H07-112>.

Todd, Zoe. 2014. "Fish Pluralities: Human-Animal Relations and Sites of
Engagement in Paulatuuq, Arctic Canada." *Études/Inuit/Studies* 38
(1--2): 217--38. <http://doi.org/10.7202/1028861ar>.

Tremblay, Mark S., Roy J. Shephard, and Lawrence R. Brawley. 2007.
"Research that Informs Canada's Physical Activity Guides: An
Introduction." *Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism*, no. 32,
S1--S8. <http://doi.org/10.1139/H07-104>.

Vintimilla, Cristina D., Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw, and Nicole Land.
2021. "Manifesting Living Knowledges: A Pedagogists' Working Manifesto."
*Journal of Curriculum and Pedagogy,* 1--10.
<http://doi.org/10.1080/15505170.2021.1955051>.

Vintimilla, Cristina D., and Veronica Pacini-Ketchabaw. 2020. "Weaving
Pedagogy in Early Childhood Education: On Openings and Their
Foreclosure." *European Early Childhood Education Research Journal* 28
(5): 628--41. <http://doi.org/10.1080/1350293X.2020.1817235>.

Ward, Pamela, Natalie Beausoleil, and Olga Heath. 2017. "Confusing
Constructions: Exploring the Meaning of Health with Children in
'obesity' Treatment." *Fat Studies* 6 (3): 255--267.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/21604851.2017.1288494>.

Warin, Megan, Vivienne Moore, Michael Davies, and Stanley Ulijaszek.
2015. "Epigenetics and Obesity: The Reproduction of *Habitus* through
Intracellular and Social Environments**.**" *Body & Society* 22 (4):
53--78.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X15590485](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1357034X15590485).

Willey, Angela. 2016. *Undoing Monogamy: The Politics of Science and the
Possibilities of Biology*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Wilson, Elizabeth A. 2015. *Gut Feminism*. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

Yano, Tokuo, Takahiro Yunoki, and Hisayoshi Ogata. 2003. "Relationship
in Simulation Between Oxygen Deficit and Oxygen Uptake in Decrement-load
Exercise Starting from Low Exercise Intensity." *Journal of
Physiological Anthropology and Applied Human Science* 22 (1): 1--5.
<https://doi.org/10.2114/jpa.22.1>.

Youdell, Deborah. 2017. "Bioscience and the Sociology of Education: The
Case for Biosocial Education." *British Journal of Sociology of
Education* 38 (8): 1273--1287.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01425692.2016.1272406>.

Yoshizawa, Rebecca Scott. 2016. "Fetal--Maternal Intra-Action: Politics
of new Placental Biologies." *Body & Society* 22 (4): 79--105.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X16662323](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1357034X16662323).

### Author Bio

**Nicole Land** is an assistant professor in the School of Early
Childhood Studies at Ryerson University. In collaboration with educators
and young children, her research works to create and sustain situated
post-developmental pedagogies that take seriously children's complex
relations with fats, muscles, physiologies, and movement.
