#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  The Slave Episteme in Biocapitalism

Alys Eve Weinbaum

University of Washington

alysw@uw.edu

### Abstract

This article explores the connection between the extraction and
dispossession of human reproductive labor power and its products in the
contexts of Atlantic slavery and contemporary biocapitalism. It argues
that the conceptualization and practice of slave reproduction that
sustained slave racial capitalism is forwarded into the biocapitalist
present through "the slave episteme." This becomes evident when
reproduction in biocapitalism is viewed through the lens of the long
history of slave "breeding" in the Atlantic world. While the supposed
"blackness" that enslavers attributed to enslaved mothers and their
progeny objectified and dehumanized both and rationalized their
treatment as fungible and alienable commodities, in contempory
biocapitalism the racial formation that subtends reproductive extraction
and dispossession has been complexly recalibrated to do related
ideological and material work. The article concludes with a discussion
of the sublation of "blackness" in contemporary market exchanges in
which reproductive labor and its products are bought and sold.

### Keywords

Reproduction, slavery, surrogacy, ARTs, racial capitalism, biocapitalism, Black feminism

### Introduction

Over the last two decades, scholars of human reproduction have examined
the development and consumption of biotechnological know-how and
assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs), especially *in vitro*
fertilization (IVF) and embryo freezing, and have honed in on expanding
markets in oocyte vending and gestational surrogacy. In attending to
human reproduction's commodification around the globe, they highlight
the extractive character of the seemingly quotidian economic exchanges
by which we are today surrounded and in which increasing numbers of
people participate as either sellers or consumers of human biological
commodities including cells, tissue, eggs, wombs, and babies. Taken
together existing scholarship documents interconnected markets that make
possible what some call "transnational reproduction" and what others
evocatively describe as the "global fertility chains" that link a range
of reproductive transactions across geographically and geopolitically
disparate spaces (Vertommen, Pavone, and Nahman 2021). Such "chains"
simultaneously connect and bind. They transform poor women in the Global
South who sell reproductive labor and products into workers who fulfill
the affective and material desires of intending parents seeking to
purchase high-tech babies (or the necessary labor, biological parts, and
biotechnological processes). Notably, consumers oftentimes elect
transnational reproduction so that they can short-circuit prohibitions
on economic transactions in their home countries. In this way, their
reproductive choices facilitate further expansion of global fertility
chains.

In limning the commodification of human reproduction that characterizes
contemporary global exchange, scholars reveal the scope and inner
workings of a version of late capitalism that is most aptly labeled
"biocapitalist."^1^ This moniker, though by no means adopted by all who
treat transnational reproduction and the global fertility chains that
secure it, is mobilized here as descriptive shorthand. In my preferred
reading, biocapitalism is both a linguistic and a conceptual term. The
prefacing "bio" draws attention to the commodification of *in vivo*
processes (ovulation, conception, gestation, and parturition), the
commodification of human biological products (cells, tissue, eggs, and
babies), and the accumulation of surplus value by those who possess the
means to invest in (as opposed to those who labor at) what I will
hereafter refer to as *(re)production*.^2^ I place parentheses around
"re" to create a term that describes how women's *in vivo* processes and
biological products move through capitalist circuits of exchange
alongside of conventional commodities, thereby constituting a
specifically (re)productive form of productive labor. As with the
exchange of conventional commodities, (re)productive commodities are
rendered alienable and fungible in and through market exchange.

In the past decade, scholars of biocapitalism have sought to treat the
colonial histories and imaginaries that subtend the (re)production of
surplus value. Attentiveness to such legacies is treated in rich
ethnographies on the processes and products offered for sale in parts of
the Global South formerly subject to colonialism, especially India
(Pande 2014; Rudrappa 2015; Hochschild 2012; Vora 2015; Deomampo 2016).
Notably, the colonial legacies of ARTs are also amplified in several
articles collected in this special issue. Settler colonialism is
examined in emergent research on ARTs in scholarship focused on contexts
subject to ongoing occupation, especially Palestine (Nahman 2013;
Vertommen 2017). Focus on both colonialism and settler colonialism is
evident in recent scholarship that takes a meta view and tracks the
spread of (re)productive markets in cryopreserved eggs and gestational
labor to new locations in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Eastern
Europe in the wake of the closure of the Indian surrogate market to
foreigner consumers in 2015 (see Parry 2022; Parry and Ghoshal 2018).
And yet, despite the attention to colonial and settler colonial
legacies, existing scholarship on (re)production in biocapitalism can be
characterized by a concerning, although largely unremarked silence on
the related issue of the impress of the legacies of Atlantic slavery on
ARTs and the global market in (re)productive labor and products more
generally. As I discuss later in this article, this silence has been
created by separation of the history of colonialism from that of
Atlantic slavery, and by tacit assumption that the history of slavery is
only truly germane in relation to analysis of surrogacy in the United
States. The upshot: in most feminist work on biocapitalism long-standing
relationships of historical reciprocity between colonialism and Atlantic
slavery----the relationships that subtended globalizing capitalism from
the outset (Robinson 1983; Lowe 2015; Melamed, 2015; Smallwood
2019)----are ignored and the impact on the present conceptualization and
practice of (re)production of four hundred years of what enslavers
called slave "breeding" all but entirely neglected.

In *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery: Biocapitalism and Black
Feminism's Philosophy of History*, I call attention to the silence and
neglect of the legacies of slavery and seek to redress it. Following in
the footsteps of Black Feminists who first wrote on surrogacy in the
1990s (Roberts 1997; Allen 1990, 1991; Rutherford 1992; Cherry 2001), I
explore the impress of the practice of slave "breeding" on contemporary
(re)production and thus account for how (re)production in biocapitalism
is conceptualized and materialized in and through ideas about human
reproductive labor and products that were brewed up in the context of
Atlantic slavery. I suggest the urgency of bringing feminist histories
of slavery in the Americas and the Caribbean to bear not only on
surrogacy in the US but also on (re)production in global
biocapitalism.^3^ Along the way I argue, that more than any other group
of scholars and activists, Black Feminists, writing across idioms
(history, theory, law, and fiction, among others) have demonstrated that
slavery shaped and continues to contour the cultures and politics of
human reproduction and mothering in the modern world.^4^ And I thus urge
scholars of (re)production in biocapitalism to follow the lead of Black
Feminists, especially those writing about surrogacy and slavery. For
when Black Feminist insights are set to work in relation to
transnational reproduction and the global fertility chains that secure
it, it becomes possible to apprehend what I have called "the afterlife
of reproductive slavery," and thus to discern the myriad itineraries and
iterations of anti-blackness in a neoliberal, supposedly post-racial
present.^5^ In sum, in the *Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery* I argue
for recognition of biocapitalism as a form of racial capitalism (more on
the latter concept shortly) that is predicated on the forwarding into
the present of ideas about racialized (re)production that were set in
place long ago.

In the present article, I reprise key arguments of my book in view of
the animating concern of this special issue: "the colonial present of
ARTs." By digging into the thorny question of the relationship of the
extraction and dispossession of (re)productive labor and products in
biocapitalism to the extraction and dispossession of (re)productive
labor and products in Atlantic slavery, I seek to contribute to the
discussion about the colonial present an understanding of the importance
of engaging with the long history of Atlantic slavery. When placed
alongside the history of colonialism, the history of slavery not only
allows for comprehension of the complex material foundation for
contemporary biocapitalism it also allows for identification of a
constitutive epistemic antecedent for the complex processes of
racialization that characterize and power the forms of (re)productive
extraction and dispossession by which we are today surrounded and in
which many participate.

Above all, the impress of the history of slavery on biocapitalism
becomes visible when we attend to what I elsewhere describe as *the
slave episteme* (2019)----the thought system, brewed up and distilled
over the course of four centuries, that initially enabled and continues
to subtend the racialization of (re)production. When tracking the slave
episteme, it is useful to underscore an instructive if seldom
acknowledged fact: There are only two periods in modern world history
during which *in vivo* (re)productive labor and products have been
expressly engineered for profit. The first of these is the extended
period of racial slavery in the Atlantic world, a period during which
enslaved women's wombs became the source of human commodities and were
themselves treated as commodities. The second is the comparatively brief
period that commences with the rise of biocapitalism and the market for
surrogate labor in the 1970s, a period that extends over several decades
into the present.

And yet, having made this point, I should clarify that my intent in
tracking the forwarding of the slave episteme into the present is not to
demonstrate a simple form of historical repetition. I neither aim to
document resurgence of human (re)productive enslavement, nor to equate
contemporary (re)productive laborers and women enslaved in the context
of Atlantic slavery. Instead, the present argument is principally
philosophical and speculative. It seeks to shift conceptualization of
the relationship of human reproduction to capitalism by highlighting not
only the role of non-commodified reproductive labor in social
reproduction (as Marxist feminists and a subsequent cohort of Social
Reproduction Theorists have so eloquently done \[Mies 1986; Federici
2012; Bhattacharya 2017) but also by highlighting the centrality of
expressly (re)productive labor. In short, I seek to offer an argument
about the persistence of an old conceptual edifice---the slave
episteme---by exploring how it time-travels and in so doing constellates
contemporary (re)productive extraction and dispossession with its
historical antecedent.

As it constellates past and present, the slave episteme does something
remarkable and remarkably disturbing: it renders contemporary
(re)productive extraction and dispossession *conceivable* in both senses
of that biologically laden term. This becomes evident when contemporary
(re)production is viewed through the lens of the long history of slave
"breeding." For when we begin from an understanding of Atlantic slavery
as an economic system that came over time to be based on (re)productive
extraction and dispossession, it becomes possible to see that
contemporary (re)productive extraction and dispossession would be
unthinkable----and thus unmaterializable----were it not for the creation
and persistent recalibration of racialized ideas about wombs as founts
of fungible and alienable commodities.

### Biocapitalism as Racial Capitalism

In advancing an argument about the afterlife of reproductive slavery,
I've found it necessary to bring the concept of biocapitalism into
conversation with that of racial capitalism. The latter was first
developed by the political scientist Cedric Robinson in his
groundbreaking study, *Black Marxism* (1983). According to Robinson
contemporary capitalism has constitutively racial origins and is powered
by ongoing racial dynamics. Drawing on a range of thinkers whom he dubs
"Black Marxist," Robinson demonstrates that there is a Black radical
tradition that has continuously elaborated on ideas first proffered by
Marx and Engels but never fully adumbrated by them. These include ideas
about the role that processes of racialization play in the creation of
the antagonisms that turn the wheels of capitalism and thus modern
history. As Robinson explains through recourse to W.E B. Du Bois and
C.L.R. James among others, complex processes of racial differentiation
not only initially enabled dispossession, enclosure, colonization,
genocide, settlement, and enslavement (in short, the combined processes
that Marx and Engels include within their account of the birth of
capitalism during what they incorrectly regard as a finite period of
"so-called primitive accumulation"), complex processes of racialization
continue to power *ongoing* capitalist expansion. As Robinson famously
observes, "the development, organization, and expansion of capitalist
society pursued essentially racial directions, \[and\] so too did social
ideology. As a material force...it could be expected that racialism
would inevitably permeate the social structures emergent from
capitalism" (1983, 2). Capitalism, Robinson concludes, is always already
racial capitalism.

Robinson's insights have transformed numerous academic fields including
slavery studies. This is unsurprising given that the history of Atlantic
slavery so clearly manifests the dynamics of racial capitalism. Within
recent historical scholarship, plantation economies in the Americas and
the Caribbean are now regarded as key players in early racial capitalist
expansion which finds its apotheosis in contemporary globalization.
Relatedly, the concept of "blackness" is now treated as the principal
ideological creation responsible for rationalizing and thus
materializing the forms of dehumanization that subtend enslavement
(Baptist 2014; Johnson 1999, 2013; Smallwood 2007), and subtend the
capitalist world system (Wallerstein 2004). In some work, Atlantic
slavery has simply been recast as "slave racial capitalism" (Johnson
2013). This coinage represents more than a semantic innovation. It
signals wholescale reconceptualization of Atlantic slavery as one
instantiation of racial capitalism among others, one that sits alongside
colonialism, settler colonialism, and, I argue, biocapitalism. Put
otherwise, the concept of slave racial capitalism invites awareness of
racial capitalism's continuous recalibration of complex processes of
racial differentiation, and of slavery as an instantiation of racial
capitalism that both precedes and shapes biocapitalism.^6^ And yet, to
fully compass the relationship of historical reciprocity between slavery
and biocapitalism it is necessary to go beyond Robinson by focusing in
on the history of (re)productive in slavery afforded by expressly
feminist historians. Together with other Black Feminist scholars of
racial capitalism, feminist historians of slavery foreground sex and
reproduction (and thus attune us to the intersection of gender and
sexuality with race and class), effectively demonstrating that slavery
was powered by both the productive and (re)productive labor of the
enslaved.^7^

Three generations of feminist historians ground my thinking on Atlantic
slavery as the world's first modern (re)productive enterprise (Davis
1971; Hine 1979; White 1985; Beckles 1989; Bush 1990; Camp 2004; Morgan
2004; Fuentes 2016; Berry 2017; Turner 2017). Hilary McD. Beckles's now
classic history of enslaved women in Barbados is especially instructive
for present purposes. As Beckles explains, earlier (non-feminist)
scholars of the oldest and most lucrative of the sugar economies were
unable to explain why it was that importation of African women
outnumbered the import of men beginning in the late seventeenth century
because they simply could not recognize female slaves as the main source
of capital accumulation within the plantation economy (1989, 2). The
situation on Barbadian plantations was not exceptional, Beckles insists,
but ought to be regarded as indexical of "the overall history of
plantation America" (5) in that it attests to a long-neglected truth:
*All* enslaved women experienced slavery as producers and *reproducers*,
as all enslaved women were valued in both capacities throughout the
Atlantic world. The task of writing the history of women in slavery is
not, therefore, the "absurd" one of "adding women to history." It is the
challenging one of restoring history to those who constituted "the
pivot"----as opposed to the tangent----around which the entire slave
enterprise turned (Beckles 1989, 5).

Like most studies of Caribbean slavery, Beckles divides his into three
distinct periods. During the first (1627--1730), planters preferred to
import African men. However, once land was cleared, women were
increasingly imported to perform agricultural work. In the second period
(1730--1790), planters came to regard African women as more manageable
and efficient than men because West and Central Africa women were
already acculturated to heavy agricultural labor. Consequently, in the
second period, import of African women dramatically increased. By the
start of the third period (1790--1838) a new gender dynamic was set in
place. Planters worked enslaved women in field gangs and invested in
their (re)productive labor. Significantly, because this last period
encompassed the imposition of the 1807 Slave Trade Act that banned
further importation of captive Africans to the New World, it is the
period of greatest interest to me here. Bracketed by the Slave Trade Act
and British abolition of slavery, this last period was characterized by
intensified \"creolization" of the slave population (Beckles's
euphemism), by increase in the valuation of enslaved women, and, most
importantly, by systematic "stimulation" of fertility (again, Beckles's
term). Specifically, enslaved women were offered "concessions" that were
expressly targeted at amelioration of the harsh, often deadly conditions
on Barbadian plantations that militated against conception, gestation,
and care for pregnancies and offspring. Although Beckles finds little
empirical evidence of what he calls "selective breeding" (by which he
presumably means the application of the principals of animal husbandry
to human beings), his analysis of management manuals detailing
plantation organization and administration support his conclusion that
slave (re)production was deliberately "orchestrated" (Beckles 1989, 92).

Planters were motivated to orchestrate (re)production by their growing
awareness that successful "increase" was fast becoming not only a useful
means by which labor power could be replenished, but after 1807 the only
means by which slave racial capitalism could be maintained. Due to
implementation of highly successful managerial strategies and use of
incentives in the late eighteenth century, by the start of the
nineteenth century, slavery in Barbados was no longer dependent on the
importation of captive Africans. Whereas in the 1730s and 1740s at least
half the children born in Barbados died within their first week of life,
by the 1790s, improved diet, lessened workload during pregnancy,
fieldwork schedules more amenable to nursing, and monetary incentives
for live births together facilitated increased (re)production and a
sharp decline in infant mortality.^8^ Nothing evinces intensified
planter investment in slave women's reproductive lives more poignantly
than changes in planter bookkeeping practices. Alongside increase in
cattle, horses, and other valuable nonhuman livestock, beginning in the
late eighteenth century they began to routinely record the birth of
slaves as capital gains (Beckles 1989, 102).

Subsequent scholarship expands on Beckles's signal contribution by
accounting not only for the material conditions of enslaved
(re)production but also for the importance of the ideological dimensions
of (re)productive enslavement to a globalizing Euro-American empire. As
Jennifer Morgan (2004) elaborates in her watershed study of the early
English colonies in the West Indies and on the North American mainland,
enslavers required both women's physical labor and their "symbolic
value" as "black," fecund, animal beings. To this end, those invested in
the slave trade created and disseminated ideas about the distinct
"blackness" of African women through discourses that tethered African
women's reproductive bodies and capacities, actual and imagined, to
their enslavability. These discourses, initiated by European travelers
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, can be gleaned from both
visual and discursive archives that together adumbrate the ideological
construction of African women as (re)productive assets, living and
breathing tools available for use. In etchings from the seventeenth
century that portray African women at work in the fields, for instance,
they are depicted nursing infants, affixed to their backs, with milk
provided by elongated breasts that are slung over their shoulders
(Morgan 2004, 12--49). In written accounts, African women are depicted
as capable of "pain-free" and "disinterested" delivery; parturition is
for them just another form of work. Indeed, for African women
reproductive and productive toil were represented as entirely compatible
activities. As travel diaries attest, African women were a breed apart,
less-than-human beings descended from a bestial point of origin that was
imagined to be "black" and therefore distinct from that of the Christian
Eve and her white European descendants (Morgan 2004, 40--47).^9^

In creating representations of African women's specifically "black"
reproduction, Europeans fueled an ideology in which "blackness"
constituted a visible mark of the biological and social distance
separating African and European women. In circulating representations of
African women as "black", Europeans naturalized the two forms of
productive labor impressed upon female slaves: agricultural work and
(re)production of human commodities. Over time, such representations
rationalized treatment of enslaved conception, gestation, parturition,
and the products of "black" women's wombs as fungible and alienable.

In so far as (re)production was deemed fungible, (re)productive labor
and products were regarded as substitutable----one commodity (including
labor power) could stand in for another so that a purely formal economic
exchange could take place.^10^ As *in vivo* labor took place within
enslaved wombs, the children being gestated within were abstracted into
the metrics of capital. Upon birth, all qualitative characteristics were
erased or instrumentalized so that children could be viewed as
commodities that could justifiably circulate in quantifiable form. In so
far as (re)productive labor was deemed alienable the "lively products"
to which women gave birth were regarded as rightfully separable from
those who (re)produced them, transferrable away from the (re)productive
body through market exchange. Like their enslaved mothers, children born
to enslaved women were regarded as chattel. Because they existed as
commodities within an exchange relationship, enslaved women who gave
birth were forced to (re)produce the foreclosure of their own
motherhood, the "natal alienation" of their children (Patterson 1982),
their own and their children\'s status as dehumanized slaves, and their
mutual loss of belonging to each other as kin. As Hortense Spillers
observes, in slavery the gendered maternal function was severed from
(re)production effectively rendering ideas such as Senator Moynihan's
"black matriarch" a violent misnaming of "the captive African
female"---she whose gender was in fact negated in and through the
abstracting calculations involved in filling the hold of the slave ship
with its "human-as-cargo" bound for the New World (1987, 72).

Taken together, the fungibility and alienability of (re)productive labor
and its products distinguish commodified (re)production from
non-commodified reproduction (for instance unremunerated domestic work,
child bearing, child rearing, care for the elderly, sick, and dying,
etc.), as non-commodified reproduction only indirectly enters into
circuits of market exchange. Put otherwise, although non-commodified
reproduction is integral to the reproduction of capitalism, as Marxist
feminists, Social Reproduction theorists, and historians of care work
and intimate labor demonstrate (Mies 1986; Federici 2012; Bhattacharya
2017; Boris and Parreñas 2010), non-commodified reproduction is not
expressly transacted in order to create surplus value in the ways that
the (re)productive labor of enslaved women was once transacted in the
context of Atlantic slavery, or the ways that it is today transacted in
the global marketplace for (re)productive labor and products.^11^

The fungibility and alienability of enslaved (re)production is nowhere
more visible than in the implementation, beginning in the second half of
the seventeenth century, of the New World interpretation of the Ancient
Roman doctrine of *partus sequitur ventrem* (Berry 2017; Morgan 2004,
2018). This Latin phrase, roughly translated as "that which comes forth
follows the womb," was enshrined in English and Spanish slave codes to
ensure that children born to enslaved women were enslaved.
Significantly, *partus* made a child born to an enslaved woman
enslaveable regardless of the race or status of the father. As a
consequence, free white men's rape of enslaved women functioned to
augment their own (or other free white men's) property. By the late
antebellum era, advertisements and bills of sale frequently classified
enslaved women as "breeders" or "breeding wenches," indicating precisely
how (re)productive labor and products were valued.^12^ Especially robust
enslaved men were selected and taken on a "breeding circuit" and
appraised for rent or sale as "studs" (Roberts 1997, 28; Berry 2017, 19,
78--79). Although limited space requires me to omit a discussion of the
sexual labor performed by male and female slaves, it is crucial to note
that while the concept of (re)production does not encompass all forms of
sexual labor, it includes, by necessity, procreative sex. In fact, the
term "(re)production" instructively illustrates (precisely because it
replicates) enslavers' enfolding of procreative sex, often in the form
of rape, into (re)productive labor. My intention in using (re)production
as a portmanteau is certainly not to minimize sexual violence in
slavery, but rather to specify the manner in which (re)productive
extraction and dispossession included extraction and dispossession of
procreative sex.^13^ Put otherwise, from the vantage point of enslavers
and thus from that of (re)production as an engine of surplus value,
enslaved sex, conception, gestation, and parturition were inextricable.
By contrast, from the vantage point of enslaved individuals and
communities, conception, gestation, and parturition were experienced as
sites of resistance, refusal, joy, hope, sadness, violation, and
violence, as scholarship on intimacy in slavery attests (Berry and
Harris 2018). Importantly, in biocapitalism (re)production rarely
requires sexual violence in the form of rape or forced "breeding"---
which is not to suggest that contemporary (re)productive laborers do not
suffer a host of psychological and bodily violations that are both
intimate and sexualized in nature.

Over time, the circular ideological construction of African and
African-descended women's reproduction as "black" was called upon to
justify the treatment of their wombs as engines of "future increase" and
thus of surplus value.^14^ Histories that account for the racialization
of enslaved (re)production and treat the role of "blackness" in the
maintenance of slave racial capitalism resonate forcefully with the
present argument. As in slave racial capitalism, in biocapitalism
racialized (re)production makes the system go. As in slavery, in
biocapitalism (re)productive labor and products are rendered fungible
and alienable through a complex process of racialization. The feminist
histories of slavery that I have briefly limned above historically
ground an argument about contemporary (re)productive extraction and
dispossession. As, I will now argue, they also constitute the foundation
upon which unique insights into the continuous recalibration of racial
capitalism may built. They allow us to see that (re)productive
extraction and dispossession in slavery both temporally precedes
(re)productive extraction and dispossession in biocapitalism, and,
therefore, they intimately link biocapitalism to the evolution of racial
capitalism.

And yet, even though slave racial capitalism and biocapitalism can be
constellated, it should not be assumed that (re)production in
biocapitalism is racialized in the same way as it was in the slave past.
In the next and final section, I offer some preliminary ideas about how
to think about the complex recalibration of racialized (re)production
over time. While anti-blackness clearly characterizes a present moment
violently saturated by myriad forms of racism, the attribution of
"blackness" to (re)productive labor and its products is no longer the
only modality through which (re)productive extraction and dispossession
operate today. Rather, in contemporary biocapitalism "blackness" is
being *sublated*, by which, I mean it is being simultaneously *negated
and preserved* in order to make biocapitalism go.

### The Sublation of "Blackness" in Biocapitalism

Although, as already observed at the outset, it could reasonably be
assumed that feminist scholarship on (re)production in biocapitalism
would center the history of slavery, substantive discussion of slavery
and its legacies is missing from most scholarship on ARTs,
biocapitalism, and the neoliberal post-racial ideologies that sustain
transnational reproduction.^15^ There appear to be several reasons for
this. Scholarship on the global fertility chains that secure
transnational reproduction is primarily concerned with the largest
(re)productive markets, those in oocytes and surrogate labor. In most
instances, oocyte vendors and surrogates are neither majority Black nor
do they predominantly reside in locales that were at one time directly
implicated in the Atlantic slave trade. When historical antecedents are
considered, as already noted, European colonialism is therefore deemed
most germane, and is too often hived off from Atlantic slavery as if the
two were not historically coincident and economically imbricated.
Separation of these histories lends itself to spurious distinctions
between slavery and remunerated or waged labor, distinctions that tend
to be reified rather than interrogated. And yet, as I elsewhere argue
(2019), in both past and present, the distinction between slavery and
waged labor is messy; and, at least when it is construed rigidly, this
distinction constitutes one of capitalism's major ideological supports.

Rather than begin from the assumption that (re)productive laborers
\"choose\" to labor for a wage (for instance, when they participate in
transnational markets as surrogates), I suggest beginning from an
insight that is neatly if perhaps too implicitly encapsulated in Marx's
quip that contract labor is a form of "wage slavery." In creating a
seeming oxymoron, Marx challenged us to consider nineteenth-century wage
labor as existent on a continuum. By extension, here I challenge us to
critically re-examine the character of the so-called choices that are
made by contemporary (re)productive laborers, women who, in some
instances, enter the market without even the supposed protection
afforded by labor contracts or other legal protections (Rudrappa 2015).
From a vantage point that apprehends the predication of liberal notions
of freedom on the exemption of slaves, the colonized, and Indigenous
Peoples from such freedom (Lowe 2015; Smallwood 2004), it is apparent
that on the underside of the supposed freedom to alienate labor power
lie interlocked forms of gendered, sexualized, and racialized governance
that divide laboring populations into categories of human and
less-than-human. Those deemed human are more likely to be remunerated
for their labor and to be perceived (and perhaps to feel themselves) as
having "chosen" to labor for a wage. Those deemed less-than-human are
more likely to be treated as disposable and to understand the ruse that
the ideology of "choice" conceals.^16^ In sum, the neglect of the
impress of the slave episteme by scholarship on biocapitalism has
troubling consequences in that it obscures the conditions and contexts
in which laborers "choose" to labor, and creates an artificially narrow
understanding of the connections between (re)production in slavery and
biocapitalism.

To demonstrate the importance of accounting for the work of the slave
episteme when seeking to understand (re)production in
biocapitalism----even in those instances and in those locales in which
slavery does not immediately appear to be relevant----I have found it
necessary to craft a reoriented approach to (re)production that treats
it as a racializing process that is being continuously recalibrated over
capitalism's *longue durée*. This reorientation begins with an
observation, indebted to feminist historians of slavery, that enslaved
women's participation in (re)productive labor was regarded as
racializing of the labor performed (it rendered it less-than-human,
"black", and therefore fungible and alienable), and of the products of
this labor. In other words, rather than begin by assuming the *a priori*
racial identity of (re)productive laborers, as existing studies of
surrogates and other participants in the (re)productive economy have
(Twine 2011; Hochschild 2012; Pande 2014; Rudrappa 2015; Vora 2015;
Deomampo 2016; Harrison 2016), I instead suggest that scholars of
(re)production in biocapitalism follow the example set by feminist
historians of slavery. This requires focus on (re)production as a
racializing process----a process that racializes the laborer and renders
her labor and products fungible and alienable.

The proposed shift in focus is intended to be expansive. It clears a
path to a historically inclusive account of the (re)productive character
of ongoing forms of "so-called primitive accumulation" in biocapitalism.
It is also intended to nuance discussions of processes of racialization
in a neoliberal moment saturated by post-racial ideologies that insist
on treating the slave past as irrelevant to the present. Indeed, the
shift to a focus on processes of racialization is intended to open our
eyes to the pervasive disavowal of the afterlife of slavery, the work of
the slave episteme in biocapitalism, and thus to the sublation---again,
by this I mean the simultaneous *negation* and the *preservation*----of
"blackness" in rationalizing processes of (re)productive extraction and
dispossession.

For the most part, analyses of race and racism emergent from critical
race studies, critical ethnic studies, Black studies, and postcolonial
studies have treated race as a social construct that is affixed to
individual bodies and populations as power is arrayed hierarchically and
white racial hegemony secured. In such analyses, race is not regarded as
biological, genetic, empirical, or, for that matter, as analytically
stable.^17^ Rather, race is examined for *how* it is equated with
phenotype and thus naturalized, for *how* it functions as a biosocial
mark, and for *how* it exerts social, political, and economic power as
it transforms over time. In short, race is variously recognized as a
process (as opposed to an identity) and as a motor of globalizing
capitalism, regimes of racial nationalism (white racial nationalism and
other forms of ethnic nationalism), colonialism, settler colonialism,
empire, or some combination of these. In situating (re)production as a
racializing process, as I do here, I suggest that the race ascribed to
individuals and populations prior to their recruitment into and
participation in (re)production ought not be construed as the only
racial calculation that enables and rationalizes (re)productive
extraction and dispossession today.

The proposed treatment of (re)production as racializing process makes
sense for several reasons. Around the globe, the (re)productive labor
force is robustly multiracial, multiethnic, and multinational. Available
information about the individuals who currently perform (re)productive
labor reveals that they are more frequently connected to each other by
their shared economic precarity than by any single racial, ethnic,
caste, religious, or national identity. Indeed, it is never solely the
*a priori* racial identity of the (re)productive laborer that renders
her (re)productive labor and products alienable and fungible. It is
always also the exchange relationship into which she enters when she
sells her (re)productive labor that precipitates a racializing process
that devalues labor and renders labor and products alienable and
fungible.

Notably, my treatment of (re)productive labor as a racializing process
resonates deeply with the dominant approach to the creation of
racialized divisions of labor as these are elaborated by labor
historians. For those who study the changing racial formation of the
labor force over time, the labor that individuals and populations engage
in or are forced to perform both creates racial identity and shapes the
racial character of labor. By virtue of her place in the division of
labor, the laborer is transformed into a racialized individual (be this
individual previously identified as "white," "black," or "Asian") and,
by extension, incorporated as a member of a racialized group thought to
be comprised of "slaves," "coolies," or "niggers" (Roediger 1991; Allen
1994; Jung 2006; Day 2016). As labor historians attest, static ideas of
race are too rigid to account for the ideological and material processes
that create the complex racial formations that were consolidated during
prior periods in the history of racial capitalist expansion (slavery,
colonialism, settler colonialism, and industrialization). Here I follow
in their footsteps and suggest that static (*a priori*) ideas of race
are likewise too rigid to account for the ideological and material
processes that create the complex racial formations that make
biocapitalism go and facilitate its expansion.

Primary emphasis on the race of (re)productive laborers cannot fully
account for the totality or complexity of the racializing processes that
subtend transnational reproduction and the global fertility chains that
secure it. On the one hand, treatment of race (or, for that matter,
ethnicity, caste, or national identity) as *a priori* has the tendency
to foreclose attention to (re)production as a process that shapes
observable divisions of labor. On the other hand, focus on the race
ascribed to laborers obscures the connectivity (or, to invoke Lowe\'s
capacious formulation "the intimacy") that has in the past existed among
those individuals and populations caught up in the violence of Atlantic
slavery, colonialism, settler colonialism, and empire, and thus in the
intertwined economic systems that first enabled and that continue to
subtend globalizing capitalism (Robinson 1983; Lowe 2015; Smallwood
2019). In sum, failure to treat (re)production as a racializing process
runs of the risk of obscuring the impress of the slave episteme (which
is never the possession of a single nation or national economy), and the
circuitous routes that it travels, crisscrossing historical epochs and
national boundaries as it renders (re)productive extraction and
dispossession conceivable and thus materializable.

And yet, an irrepressible question remains: What happens in the present
moment to the specific form of "blackness" that functioned as product
and rational for (re)productive extraction and dispossession in slavery?
I believe that a preliminary answer to this question lies in realization
that "blackness" is one but never the only modality through which the
slave episteme is forwarded into the present. Today "blackness" is no
longer the only mark of alienability and fungibility; rather, it has
been both expanded and abstracted, recalibrated and erased. This is
because biocapitalism has a hegemonic neoliberal cast that sometimes
successfully, and at other times unsuccessfully, obscures from view the
historically sedimented processes of racialization that have subtended
(re)productive extraction and dispossession over time.^18^ As noted
earlier, these include (but cannot be reduced to) processes of
racialization that powered *partus sequitur ventrem,* the doctrine that
was encoded in Slave Law to ensure that in slavery the enslaved woman
was transformed into a "black" womb (re)producing alienable and fungible
commodities rather than children.

In the current historical conjuncture, practices of (re)productive
extraction and dispossession that are predicated on the forwarding of
the slave episteme can be further illuminated by drilling down on the
verb *to sublate*. As a philosophical concept, sublation has been most
fully elaborated by Hegel, subsequent Hegelian philosophers, and Marxist
theorists. In their usage (as opposed to the colloquial one) sublation
is neither synonymous with disappearance nor repression. Rather, it is
an active verb that describes the paradoxical movement through which
ways of being in the world (Hegel's idea of dialectics) and systems of
power such as feudalism or capitalism (Marx's idea of history) are
simultaneously negated and preserved by opposing forces that transform
the status quo by altering it over time. In certain strands of Marxist
theory, sublation is used to describe the historical processes that
continuously reshape the hegemony, not by toppling it in one fell swoop
but rather by taking up new positions within an ongoing struggle for
dominance. The national bourgeois revolutions that led to the birth of
industrial capitalism are perhaps the most well-known example of the
dialectical process of sublation. The proletarian revolution that Marx
and subsequent generations of Marxists believe will eventuate in the
destruction of the system of bourgeois private property is the most
anticipated. The *Oxford English Dictionary* captures the duality of the
verb *to sublate* in a definitional quotation: "It is the actualization
of the system that makes it rational, and sublates past history into a
rationally-necessary moment of the whole."

In returning to the irrepressible question about the role that
"blackness" plays in biocapitalism, I venture the following formulation:
*biocapitalism sublates slavery and the ongoing work of the slave
episteme by negating, or actively obscuring from view the centrality of
a preserved if at once altered process of (re)productive racialization
that was once, but is no longer exclusively predicated on the creation
of "blackness" as the rationale for rendering (re)productive labor and
its products alienable and fungible.*^19^

The dual action of negation and preservation that characterizes
sublation is amplified in biocapitalism because the interlinked
neoliberal ideologies of colorblindness and post-racialism with which
biocapitalism is conjoined require that the forms of racial capitalism
that were historically pervasive (slavery and colonialism) be regarded
as antiquated, regimes of the past that are no longer today relevant.
However, as already argued, it is precisely the processes of
(re)productive racialization that were brewed up in slavery that are
currently being recalibrated, and thus that persist in and through the
contemporary exchange of (re)productive labor and products. Borrowing
and at once tweaking the definitional quotation taken from the *Oxford
English Dictionary*, I conclude by observing that "blackness" as the
mark of (re)production's racialization has come over time to constitute
a "rationally-necessary moment of the whole." This "moment" is now being
sublated (rather than transcended or eclipsed) by pervasive, persistent,
and patently ahistorical neoliberal ideologies such as post-racialism.
In sum, today the slave episteme subtends processes of (re)productive
racialization even though the "blackness" of (re)productive labor and
products is no longer always visible as the primary expression of such
processes.

In the preceding pages, I have argued that the history of (re)production
in Atlantic slavery ought to be accounted for alongside the history of
reproduction in colonialism in scholarship on transnational reproduction
and the global fertility chains that secure it, and in work on
contemporary forms of racial capitalism including biocapitalism. In
advancing this argument, I have suggested that the slave episteme,
brewed up in slavery, is currently being forwarded into the
biocapitalist present. In arguing thus, I do not mean to imply that the
slave episteme determines the totality of contemporary social and
economic relations as these pertain to contemporary (re)productive
extraction and dispossession. There are clearly multiple and overlapping
processes at work in each specific reproductive market; together, these
processes enable (re)productive extraction and dispossession globally.
Relatedly, there will always be many racial marks (each of which is
likewise historically moored) that are today sublated alongside
"blackness". As others in this special issue demonstrate, it is
imperative to account for colonial legacies and settler colonial
practices when examining (re)productive extraction and dispossession in
former colonies and in contexts of ongoing settler occupation. And yet,
even as we track what I would suggest we shorthand "the colonial
episteme" and "the settler colonial episteme," scholarship on
(re)production in biocapitalism can only be fully responsive to the
history of (re)productive racialization that has enabled biocapitalist
expansion when it attends to the slave episteme, and thus to the
continuous recalibration of (re)production as a racializing process that
is rooted in four hundred years of racial slavery.

Sustained consideration of the forwarding of the slave episteme in
biocapitalism has the capacity to thicken existing theorization of the
"racial reproductive imaginaries" (Deomampo 2016) that together inform
how and why consumers select both surrogates and eggs. Reciprocally,
sustained consideration of the forwarding of the slave episteme has the
ability to nuance analysis of (re)productive laborers' experiences of
the racialized roles that they play in the lives of those who consume
(re)productive labor and products. Beyond the instructive examples of
surrogacy and oocyte vending, consideration of the forwarding of the
slave episteme in biocapitalism has the capacity to make us aware of the
anti-blackness that powers racial capitalism *tout court*. Clearly
processes of (re)productive racialization will continue to shift and
change in myriad ways. Sustained consideration of the work of the slave
episteme might yet transform our collective consciousness of these
shifts and changes, and enable greater attunement to the ways in which
(re)productive extraction and dispossession simultaneously preserve and
negate "blackness" and, in the process, create the complex and
historically sedimented racial formations that are mobilized by
biocapitalism in the service of its ongoing expansion.

### Notes

^1^ In 2003 Sarah Franklin and Margaret Lock observed that "shifts in
the definition of biology-as-capital involve a prioritization of
reproduction," thus announcing human reproduction's emergence as a
"primary generator of wealth, agency, and value" in biosciences
dependent on human research participants for what are often
euphemistically referred to as "donations" or "gifts" of reproductively
derived raw materials (Franklin and Locke 2003, 7). Subsequent
scholarship fills out the portrait of a rapidly changing landscape.
Contributions that inform the present argument demonstrate the
centrality of human (re)production to the emergence of biocapitalism.
Waldby and Mitchell (2006) develop the concept of "tissue economies"
through analysis of embryonic stem cell and umbilical cord blood
banking; Franklin (2007, 2013) tracks marketization of cloning back to
innovations in animal husbandry and forward to IVF\'s transformation of
human kinship; Spar (2006) examines the "commerce of conception";
Dickenson (2008) treats "global markets in baby making"; Cooper (2008)
explores financialization of "life itself" through production of "life
as surplus"; Vora (2015) joins Hochschild (2012) in analysis of
outsourcing of emotional labor and intimate life in the Indian surrogate
market; Cooper and Waldby (2014) develop the concept of "clinical
labor\" to describe commodification of *in vivo* processes, including
surrogacy.

^2^ Here I extend earlier meditations on the use of the labor theory of
value (LTV) to theorize surrogacy as a form of (re)productive labor
(Weinbaum 1994). With the parentheses surrounding (re) I differentiate
an approach rooted in the LTV from Marxist feminist "dual systems"
approaches focused on unremunerated or non-commodified reproductive
labor and autonomist feminist arguments focused on recognition of the
productive value of unremunerated reproductive labor in the home.

^3^ *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery* (Weinbaum 2019) focuses on
surrogacy (as opposed to other ARTs) because I regard surrogacy as a
unique heuristic device that provides insight into how *all* forms or
(re)productive extraction and dispossession function in biocapitalism.
Put otherwise, analysis of surrogacy opens the way to comprehension of
racialized (re)productive extraction and dispossession in biocapitalism
generally.

^4^ In addition to centering contributions by feminist historians of
slavery (as I discuss shortly), *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery*
treats Black Feminist literary scholars (Carby 1987; Christian 1985;
Hartman 1997, 2007), Black Feminist legal scholars (Williams 1991;
Roberts 1997; Allen 1990, 1991; Rutherford 1992; Cherry 2001), Black
Feminist theorists (Spillers 1987; Davis 1971, 1998), Black Feminist
reproductive justice activists (Ross and Solinger 2017), and novelists
such as Toni Morrison and Octavia Butler.

^5^ The concept of "the afterlife of reproductive slavery" is indebted
to Saidiya Hartman's (2007) signal contribution on the "afterlife of
slavery." See also Hartman (1997).

^6^ The idea of "slave racial capitalism" also invites consideration of
slavery as an early form of biocapitalism, albeit one to which the
relatively new conceptual term can only be applied retroactively. Though
it is beyond the scope of the present essay to treat this relationship
as I do elsewhere (2019), it is worth noting that contrary to Birch and
Tyfield (2012), who argue that the "bio" prefacing capitalism obscures
economic realities, I regard the "bio" as revelatory in that it points
to what is old (the slave episteme) about a supposedly new economic
formation---namely, the commodification of (re)productive labor and
products.

^7^ Numerous Black Feminists theorize intersections of race, gender, and
class and thus contribute to a specifically Black Feminist understanding
of racial capitalism. Though this rich scholarship cannot be adequately
represented in a single note, contributions that inform my thinking here
include Angela Y. Davis (1971, 1981, 1998), the Combahee River
Collective (1982), Carole Boyce Davies (2008), Sarah Haley (2016), and
Shauna Sweeney (2021).

^8^ Beckles observes, "the ameliorations of the late eighteenth century
can be defined as a system of thought and practice by which money that
would have been otherwise spent on...buying unseasoned Africans was used
to improve the lot of existing slaves in order to induce them to breed
their replacements" (1989, 97).

^9^ Ideas about European descendants of Eve as cursed with pain in
childbirth paved the way for ideas about European sensate difference as
a sign of racial superiority, and later as a basis for the theory of
polygenesis (Morgan 2004, 40--47).

^10^ Hortense Spillers (1987) first theorized the abstracting logic of
enslavement as an erasure of the gender specificity of "the captive
African female" who is reduced to a quantity of commodified "flesh" that
fills a designated space within the hold of the slave ship. Elsewhere I
argue that when Spillers extends her insight about the ungendering of
"the captive African female" to the question of enslaved (re)production,
she effectively illuminates the manner in which slave (re)production
depended upon the world historic application of the logic of fungibility
to *in vivo* bodily processes and human biological products. (In so
doing, Spillers compels questions about the gender of contemporary
(re)production. See next note). Hartman (1997) extends Spillers' ideas
about "black" fungibility through examination of the ontological and
epistemological violence to which women were subject during and after
slavery. Afropessimists such as Frank Wilderson and Jared Sexton drill
down on ontological violence through examination of the persistence of
anti-blackness and the foreclosure of "black" subjectivity in the wake
of slavery (Winnubst 2020, 105). Other recent scholarship on fungibility
moves in more liberatory directions. C. Riley Snorton (2017)
influentially argues that the ungendering of blackness that first
transpires in Middle Passage can and should be linked to transness, and,
conversely, transness to blackness. Tiffany Lethabo King (2019)
powerfully attests that blackness is irreducible to the commodity form
precisely because it is fungible. For Snorton and King, fungibility is
defiant, a resource for insurgent, life-affirming identity formation. In
the present essay, I build on Spillers to argue that a specifically
(re)productive form of enslaved fungibility continues to violently
subtend racial capitalist expansion. Elsewhere, I examine how attention
to the ungendering of enslaved deepens our understanding of racial
capitalism, opens up new questions about enslaved (re)production's
gender dynamics, and, potentially, allows for more expansive
conceptualization of Reproductive Justice (Weinbaum, forthcoming 2022;
Weinbaum forthcoming; Ross and Solinger 2017).

^11^ Though it is impossible in the limited space of the present essay
to treat the implications of the ungendering of the enslaved that
Spillers' (1987) essay opens up, suffice it to note that this
ungendering ought to ideally inform theorization of (re)production.
Whereas non-commodified reproductive labor is today feminized and thus
denigrated, devalued, underpaid, and hyper-exploited, commodified
(re)production (i.e., surrogacy, egg vending, etc.) is shaped *both* by
the feminization of non-commodified reproduction *and* by the
ungendering of the enslaved in ways that scholars of biocapitalism have
yet to adumbrate.

^12^ Berry argues that the terms "breeder" or "breeding wench" were
largely descriptive as opposed to pejorative in the early antebellum
period. It was only after the closure of the transatlantic trade that
these terms were used to indicate the market value attributed to
enslaved women (2017, 20--21). Throughout I have enclosed the terms
"breeding" and "breeder" in quotations marks to indicate both their
violence and pliability.

^13^ Berry (2017) introduces the term "third party rape" to describe how
enslaved women *and* men were used against their will by enslavers.
Davis (1971), Hartman (1997), and Berry and Harris (2018) examine
enslavers' use of myriad forms of sexual violence as racial terror.

^14^ Morgan demonstrates that planters' wills reveal their understanding
of the importance of the transfer of reproductive assets to future
generations and their investment in reproductive speculation (2004, 92).
Berry argues that speculation on "future increase" was commonplace and
that enslavers placed value on "preconception" (2017, Chapter 1).

^15^ Here I distinguish between dominant trends in scholarship on
transnational reproduction and Black Feminist treatments of surrogacy in
the US in the 1990s (Allen 1990, 1991; Cherry 2001; Rutherford 1992;
Davis 1998; Williams 1991; Roberts 1997) that link surrogacy to slavery.
Important recent contributions by the Race and Reproductivities Working
Group showcased in a double issue of *Medical Anthropology* (Valdez and
Deomampo 2019) also examine racialization in ways the depart from
dominant trends in scholarship through focus on how "race materializes
through biogenetic, phenotypic, and cultural imaginaries" (554) that
shape reproductive markets.

^16^ Several scholars of surrogacy in India (Pande; Rudrappa) argue that
surrogates ought to be regarded as "free" agents who "choose" to
surrogate. Notably, enslaved women exercised profound forms of agency
when they sought to shape or refuse their (re)productive enslavement,
and yet no scholar of slavery argues they had free choice (Davis 1971;
Hine 1979; Morgan 2004; Turner 2017; Weinbaum 2019).

^17^ This is especially important in a context in which biological ideas
of race resurface in genetic guise despite scientific consensus that
race is not located in our genes (Reardon 2005; Weinbaum 2007; Roberts
2011; TallBear 2013).

^18^ Two of neoliberalism's most salient features are the burdening of
individuals with excessive responsibility, and the hyper-exploitation of
people of color. Both are buttressed by ascendance of ideologies of
color-blindness and post-racialism (Harvey 2005; Brown 2003, 2006;
Melamed 2011).

^19^ In arguing that "blackness" is sublated in biocapitalism, I
dialogue with scholars of biopower who regard racialization as a context
bound and ever shifting form of dehumanization (Weheliye 2014; Mbembe
2003). In exposing the Eurocentrism of foundational theories (Michel
Foucault and Giorgio Agamben), Weheliye and Mbembe demonstrate that
"blackness" is never the only racial cut or "caesura" (to use Foucault's
original term) that generates the distinctions upon which biopower (and,
here I add, biocapitalism) depends----distinctions between living beings
entitled to full humanity and those denied it; and those between living
beings who (in Foucault\'s formulation) are "made to live," and those
who (in Agamben\'s formulation) may "be killed with impunity."

### References

Allen, Anita L. 1990. "Surrogacy, Slavery and the Ownership of Life."
*Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy* 13 (1): 139--49.

----------. 1991. "The Black Surrogate Mother." *Harvard Blackletter
Journal* 8: 17-31.

Allen, Theodore W. 1994. *The Invention of the White Race*. Vol. 1,
*Racial Oppression and Social Control*. London: Verso.

Baptist, Edward E. 2014. *The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the
Making of American Capitalism*. New York: Basic Books.

Beckles, Hilary McD. 1989. *Natural Rebels: A Social History of Enslaved
Women in Barbados*. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Berry, Daina Ramey. 2017. *The Price for Their Pound of Flesh: The Value
of the Enslaved, from Womb to Grave, in the Building of a Nation*.
Boston: Beacon Press.

Berry, Daina Ramey, and Leslie M. Harris, eds. 2018. *Sexuality and
Slavery: Reclaiming Intimate Histories in the Americas*. Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press.

Bhattacharya, Tithi, ed. 2017. *Social Reproduction Theory: Remapping
Class, Recentering Oppression*. London: Pluto Press.

Birch, Kean, and David Tyfield. 2012. "Theorizing the Bioeconomy:
Biovalue, Biocapital, and Bioeconomics or...What?" *Science Technology
and Human Values* 38 (3): 299--327.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243912442398](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0162243912442398).

Boris, Eileen, and Rhacel Salazar Parreñas. 2010. *Intimate Labors:
Cultures, Technologies, and the Politics of Care*. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

Brown, Wendy. 2003. "Neo-liberalism and the End of Liberal Democracy."
*Theory & Event* 7 (1). <https://muse.jhu.edu/article/48659>.

---------. 2006. "American Nightmare: Neoliberalism, Neoconservatism,
and De-democratization." *Political Theory* 34 (6): 690--714.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591706293016](https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0090591706293016).

Bush, Barbara. 1990. *Slave Women in Caribbean Society, 1650--1838.*
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Camp, Stephanie. 2004. *Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Everyday
Resistance in the Plantation South*. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.

Carby, Hazel. 1987. *Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the
Afro-American Woman Novelist*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cherry, April L. 2001. "Nurturing in the Service of White Culture:
Racial Subordination, Gestational Surrogacy, and the Ideology of
Motherhood." *Texas Journal of Women and the Law* 10 (2): 83--128.
<https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/tjwl10&i=89>.

Christian, Barbara. 1985. *Black Feminist Criticism: Perspective on
Black Women Writers*. New York: Pergamon.

Combahee River Collective. 1982. "A Black Feminist Statement." In *All
the Women Are White, All the Black Are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave,*
edited by Akasha (Gloria T.) Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara
Smith, 13-22. New York: Feminist Press.

Cooper, Melinda. 2008. *Life as Surplus: Biotechnology and Capitalism in
the Neoliberal Era*. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Cooper, Melinda, and Catherine Waldby. 2014. *Clinical Labor: Tissue
Donors and Research Subjects in the Global Bioeconomy*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Day, Iyko. 2016. *Alien Capital: Asian Racialization and the Logic of
Settler Colonial Capitalism*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Davies, Carole Boyce. 2008. *Left of Karl Marx: The Political Life of
Black Communist Claudia Jones*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Davis, Angela. 1971. "Reflections on Black Women's Role in the Community
of Slaves." *The Black Scholar* 3 (4): 2--15.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00064246.1971.11431201>.

---------. 1981. *Women, Race, and Class*. New York: Random House.

---------. 1998. "Surrogates and Outcast Mothers: Racism and
Reproductive Politics in the Nineties." In *The Angela Y. Davis Reader,*
edited by Joy James, 210--21. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Deomampo, Daisy. 2016. *Transnational Reproduction: Race, Kinship and
Commercial Surrogacy in India*. New York: New York University Press.

Dickenson, Donna. 2008. *Body Shopping: The Economy Fueled by Flesh and
Blood*. Oxford: Oneworld.

Franklin, Sarah. 2007. *Dolly Mixtures: The Remaking of Genealogy*.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

---------. 2013. *Biological Relatives: IVF, Stem Cells and the Future
of Kinship*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Franklin, Sarah, and Margaret Lock. 2003. "Animation and Cessation: The
Remaking of Life and Death." In *Remaking Life and Death: Toward an
Anthropology of Biosciences*, 3--22. Santa Fe, NM: School of American
Research Press.

Federici, Silvia. 2012. *Revolution at Point Zero: Housework,
Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle*. Oakland: PM Press.

Fuentes, Marisa J. 2016. *Dispossessed Lives: Enslaved Women, Violence
and the Archive.* Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Haley, Sarah. 2016. *No Mercy Here: Gender, Punishment, and the Making
of Jim Crow Modernity*. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Harrison, Laura. 2016. *Brown Bodies, White Babies: The Politics of
Cross-Racial Surrogacy*. New York: New York University Press.

Hartman, Saidiya. 1997. *Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and
Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century America.* New York: Oxford University
Press.

---------. 2007. *Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic Slave
Route*. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Harvey, David. 2005. *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Hine, Darlene C. 1979. "Female Slave Resistance: The Economics of Sex."
*Western Journal of Black Studies* 3 (2): 123--27.

Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 2012. *The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in
Market Times*. New York: Metropolitan Books.

Johnson, Walter. 1999. *Soul by Soul: Life inside the Antebellum Slave
Market*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

---------. 2013. *River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and Empire in the Cotton
Kingdom*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Jung, Moon-Ho. 2006. *Coolies and Cane: Race, Labor, and Sugar in the
Age of Emancipation*. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

King, Tiffany Lethabo. 2019. *The Black Shoals Offshore Formations of
Black and Native Studies*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Lowe, Lisa. 2015. *Intimacies of Four Continents*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Mbembe, Achille. 2003. "Necropolitics." Translated by Libby Meintjes.
*Public Culture* 15 (1): 11--40.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/9781478007227-004>.

Melamed, Jodi. 2011. *Represent and Destroy: Rationalizing Violence in
the New Racial Capitalism*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

---------. 2015. "Racial Capitalism." *Critical Ethnic Studies* 1 (1):
76--85. <https://doi.org/10.5749/jcritethnstud.1.1.0076>.

Mies, Maria. 1986. *Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women
in the International Division of Labor*. London: Zed Books.

Morgan, Jennifer L. 2004. *Laboring Women: Reproduction and Gender in
New World Slavery*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

---------. 2018. "Partus Sequitur Ventrem: Law, Race and Reproduction in
Colonial Slavery." *Small Axe* 22 (1): 1--17.
[https://www.muse.jhu.edu/article/689365](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/689365).

Nahman, Michal Rachel. 2013. *Extractions: An Ethnography of
Reproductive Tourism*. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Pande, Amrita. 2014. *Wombs in Labor: Transnational Commercial Surrogacy
in India*. New York: Columbia University Press.

Parry, Bronwyn, and Rakhi Ghoshal. 2018. "Regulation of Surrogacy in
India: Whenceforth Now?" *BMJ Global Health*.
<http://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2018-000986>.

Patterson, Orlando. 1982. *Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative
Study*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Reardon, Jenny. 2005. *Race to the Finish: Identity and Governance in an
Age of Genomics*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Roberts, Dorothy E. 1997*. Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction,
and the Meaning of Liberty*. New York: Pantheon.

---------. 2011. *Fatal Invention: How Science, Politics and Big
Business Re-create Race in the Twenty-First Century*. New York: New
Press.

Robinson, Cedric. 1983. *Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical
Tradition*. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Roediger, David. 1991. *The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of
the American Working Class*. London: Verso.

Ross, Loretta, and Rickie Solinger. 2017. *Reproductive Justice: An
Introduction*. Oakland: University of California Press.

Rudrappa, Sharmila. 2015. *Discounted Life: The Price of Global
Surrogacy in India*. New York: New York University Press.

Rutherford, Charlotte. 1992. "Reproductive Freedoms and African American
Women." *Yale Journal of Law and Feminism* 4 (2): 255--90.
<https://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/yjlf/vol4/iss2/3/>.

Smallwood, Stephanie E. 2004. "Commodified Freedom: Interrogating the
Limits of Anti-Slavery Ideology in the Early Republic." *Journal of the
Early Republic* 24 (2): 289--98.
<https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812207231.139>.

---------. 2007. *Saltwater Slavery: A Middle Passage from Africa to
American Diaspora*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

---------. 2019. "Reflections on Settler Colonialism, the Hemispheric
Americas, and Chattel Slavery." *William and Mary Quarterly* 76 (3):
407--16. <https://doi.org/10.5309/willmaryquar.76.3.0407>.

Snorton, C. Riley. 2017. *Black on Both Sides: A Racial History of Trans
Identity.* Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Spar, Debora. 2006. *The Baby Business: How Money, Science, and Politics
Drive the Commerce of Conception*. Boston: Harvard Business School.

Spillers, Hortense J. 1987. "Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe: An American
Grammar Book." *Diacritics* 17 (2): 65--81.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/464747>.

Sweeney, Shauna. 2021. "Gendering Capitalism and the Black Heretical
Tradition." In *Histories of Racial Capitalism,* edited by Dustin
Jenkins and Justin Leroy, 53--83. New York: Columbia University Press.

*Oxford English Dictionary*. 2019. S.v. "Sublate." 3rd ed. Accessed
online.

TallBear, Kim. 2013. *Native American DNA: Tribal Belonging and the
False Promise of Genetic Science*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.

Turner, Sasha. 2017. *Contested Bodies: Pregnancy, Childbearing, and
Slavery in Jamaica*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Twine, France Widdance. 2011. *Outsourcing the Womb: Race, Class, and
Gestational Surrogacy in a Global Market*. New York: Routledge.

Vora, Kalindi. 2015. *Life Support: Biocapital and the New History of
Outsourced Labor*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Valdez, Natali, and Daisy Deomampo. 2019. "Centering Race and Racism in
Reproduction." *Medical Anthropology* 38 (7): 551--59.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01459740.2019.1643855>.

Vertommen, Sigrid. 2017. "Babies from Behind the Bars: Stratified
Assisted Reproduction in Israel/Palestine." In *Assisted Reproduction in
Movement Standarization and Renegotiation,* edited by Merete Lie and
Nina Lykke, 207--18. New York: Routledge.

Vertommen, Sigrid, Vincenzo Pavone, and Michal Nahman. 2021. "Global
Fertility Chains: An Integrative Political Economy Approach to
Understanding the Reproductive Bioeconomy." *Science, Technology and
Human Value*. <https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0162243921996460>.

Waldby, Catherine, and Robert Mitchell. 2006. *Tissue Economies: Blood,
Organs, and Cell Lines in Late Capitalism*. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 2004. *World Systems Analysis*. Durham, NC: Duke
University.

Weheliye, Alexander G. 2014. *Habeas Viscus: Racializing Assemblages,
Biopolitics, and Black Feminist Theories of the Human*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Weinbaum, Alys E. 1994. "Marx, Irigaray, and the Politics of
Reproduction." *Differences* 6 (1): 98--128.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv47wcjp.17>.

---------. 2007. "Racial Aura: Walter Benjamin and the Work of Art in a
Biotechnological Age." *Literature and Medicine* 26 (1): 207--39.
[https://doi.org/
10.1353/lm.2008.0011](https://doi.org/10.1353/lm.2008.0011).

---------. 2019. *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery: Biocapitalism
and Black Feminism\'s Philosophy of History*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

---------. Forthcoming. 2022. "Ungendering Intersectionality and
Reproductive Justice, Returning to Hortense Spillers." In *The Routledge
Companion to Intersectionality,* edited by Jennifer C. Nash and Samantha
Pinto. New York: Routledge.

----------. Forthcoming. "Racial Capitalism and Reproductive
Accumulation." *History of the Present: A Journal of Critical History*.

White, Deborah Gray. 1985. *Ar'n't I a Woman? Female Slaves in the
Plantation South*. New York: Norton.

Williams, Patricia J. 1991. *The Alchemy of Race and Rights: Diary of a
Law Professor*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Winnubst, Shannon. 2020. "The Many Lives of Fungibility: Anti-Blackness
in Neoliberal Times." *Journal of Gender Studies* 29 (1): 102--112.
[[https://doi.org/10.1080/09589236.2019.1692193]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1080/09589236.2019.1692193).

### Author Bio

**Alys Eve Weinbaum** is a professor of English at the University of
Washington. She is author, most recently, of *The Afterlife of
Reproductive Slavery: Biocapitalism and Black Feminism's Philosophy of
History* (Duke University Press, 2019). Her work contributes to the
history of racial capitalism and the cultures and politics of human
reproduction that both subtend and refuse it.
