#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  Fluid-Bonding and Feelings Condoms: Ambivalent Technologies of Queer Safer Sex 

Chris Barcelos

University of Massachusetts Boston

Chris.Barcelos@umb.edu

### Abstract

There is an *abundance* of scholarship on knowledge, behaviors, and
attitudes related to safer sex technologies and practices, including a
growing body of work that analyses the politics of *pre-exposure*
prophylaxis (PrEP). 

### Keywords 

critical public health, safer sex, queer, transgender, sex education, feminist social studies of science 

### Introduction

The point of departure for this project began with my observations about
the politics surrounding a specific safer sex practice *germane* to queer
communities: the.

### A Short and Incomplete Genealogy of Gloves and Dams for Safer Sex 

Although there is a growing body of literature that explores the social
and political meanings of the biochemical safer sex technology
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP).

### Acknowledgments

Many thanks to Mal√∫ Machuca Rose and Anya Katz for their assistance on
this research.

### Notes 

Not all queer and transgender people, including my interview
participants, use these terms to describe their bodies. All direct
quotes contain the words that participants used to describe themselves.

^2^ For the most part, the literature on "women who have sex with women"
assumes, but does not state, that "women" is synonymous with "cisgender
women."

^3^ Today, *BDSM* is the most common acronym to refer to the community,
whereas in the era I discuss in this paragraph it was more common to use
*SM*.

^4^ All interviews took place prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and thus
reflect sexual interactions that took place before the widespread
disruptions to social and sexual life.

^5^ "Strapped" refers to a cock (e.g., dildo) that the user straps to
their body with a harness. "Strapless" refers to a cock that is attached
to the body (that someone was born with or had surgically constructed)
that does not require a harness.

^6^ All names are pseudonyms. Participants either picked their pseudonym
or instructed the research team to pick one that matched their gender
identity. We asked all participants to inform us of the pronoun they
would like used in this manuscript.

^7^ All discussions of dental dams for oral sex related to oral sex
performed on a vulva. Although some people use dams for analingus, or
"rimming," no participants in this study reported doing so.

^8^ However, this belief is rapidly shifting as PrEP has been replacing
condom use in gay male communities.

### References
[refs here]

### Author Bio 

**Chris Barcelos** is Assistant Professor of Women's, Gender, and
Sexuality Studies at the University of Massachusetts Boston and the
author of *Distributing Condoms and Hope: The Racialized Politics of
Youth Sexual Health* (University of California Press, 2020).
