#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

##  Data Surrogates as Hosts: Politics of Environmental Governance 

Akshita Sivakumar

University of California - San Diego

asivakum@ucsd.edu

### Abstract

Data-driven environmental governance within the standard regulatory
regime routinely relies on unmeasurable, missing, or abjected data.
Technocrats typically use *data surrogates* to alleviate this pervasive
problem. By combining feminist technoscience and critical environmental
justice approaches, this article argues that data surrogates are far
more than fungible substitutes and rely on more than scientific
rationality and transcendent objectivity. Through a case of intersecting
environmental governance and justice work in the Portside Community in
San Diego, this article exposits a broader conceptualization of data
surrogates by developing a partial typology of operations they perform:
*calibrating, weighting,* and *validating.* The politics and labors of
these operations are crucial to analyze how data acquire material and
discursive power in environmental governance. I propose an analytical
shift from examining the work of data surrogates in terms of
*substituting* to one of *hosting*. This shift reveals and better
explains how data surrogates negotiate relationships between body,
place, and property across state, market, and civil society actors.
Moreover, it demonstrates how data surrogates interrupt the dominant
regulatory regime by resisting fungibility through acts of social
reproduction. Far from being subordinate to technocratic tools, the work
of social reproduction makes governing with scientific and technical
instruments both possible and contestable.

### Keywords 

### governance, critical environmental justice, abstraction, surrogates, hosting, social reproduction 

### Introduction 

My throat immediately constricted when I walked to a public meeting in
October 2019 about the toxic air of San Diego's Portside Community
(Portside). I hocked, belatedly echoing my asthmatic mother's expulsions
from twenty years ago. Struggling to locate the meeting venue, an
elementary school, my eyes adjusted to the street's unexpected darkness
with the help of the speckled lights of neighboring industrial
facilities. The ocean breeze drew particulate matter from the shipyards,
navy facility, railyard, and highways, and joined me at the threshold of
the school's cafeteria just as its double doors burst open for the
meeting. The room was filled with community representatives, including
residents, environmental activists, business owners, port commissioners,
and officials from the San Diego Air Pollution Control District (APCD).
The most significant discussion that evening was how a new state bill
could help Portside collect granular data to alleviate its urgent
problem of toxic air pollution. The politics of subsequently filling in
for missing, unmeasurable, and compromised data while striving for
environmental justice is the focus of this article.

Portside comprises Barrio Logan, Logan Heights, and Sherman Heights in
San Diego and West National City. The community has a predominant
population of poor, Chicanx and Latinx residents. For instance, the
Barrio Logan neighborhood comprises about 96 percent minority residents,
78 percent of residents characterized as low income, and about 75
percent living in rental properties. Barrio Logan has been a linchpin in
many environmental justice (EJ) efforts and Chicanx uprisings in
Southern California, most significantly between the 1940s and 1960s to
protest the city's rezoning of the barrio that prioritized scrapyards,
shipyards, and Interstate 5 over its marginalized residents. EJ
highlights how marginalized communities disproportionately bear the
burdens of exposure to pollutants (Bullard 2000), and in Barrio Logan
activists have organized against these burdens and fought for cleaner
air in the community through a historically robust social infrastructure
of organizers rooted in working-class and racial struggles. As a result
of this existing social infrastructure, the state agency that oversees
air regulations, the California Air Resources Board (CARB), selected
Portside as one of fifteen communities to pilot Assembly Bill 617 (AB
617) in 2019. Also called the Community Air Protection Plan, AB 617 is a
landmark piece of legislation California passed in 2017. It is the first
to focus on toxic contaminants and criteria pollutants rather than
greenhouse gases and the first in the United States to privilege
community-scale monitoring to address air quality inequity by providing
measurement resources to disadvantaged areas throughout California.

### Business-as-Usual Abstractions

The EJ movement in Portside routinely confronts the regulatory regime,
as it did with AB 617. The term *regulatory regime* refers to the ideas,
institutions, tools, and policies that structure and govern social
relations among community groups, the state, and the market through
historically particular political-economic forces and bureaucratic
measures (Eisner 1993; Levi-Faur 2011). Environmental governance is one
such regulatory regime. The contemporary environmental regulatory regime
converts and manages natural resources into public and private ones. It
does so through command and control, a mechanism that purports to
designate relationships of duty and enforcement---the duty not to
pollute and the enforcement of this duty through technology-based
standards and bureaucratic measures. However, as Max Liboiron has noted,
this system effectively functions as a "permission to pollute," where
the environment is considered capable of coping with or "assimilating"
contaminants up to a certain threshold, crossing which a contaminant
becomes a pollutant (2021, 39). Under this regime, in California,
metrics such as "safe harbor levels" identify exposure levels of
chemical contaminants that pose "no significant risk" to those exposed.
Command and control predominantly relies on trust in rational expertise,
scientific objectivity, and data-driven tools---such as models and
monitors---to anticipate and mitigate risk (Beck 1992; Eisner 1993;
Fortun 2012; Porter 1992, 1996); to generate, manage, and operationalize
data for regulation (Edwards 2010; Miller and Edwards 2001); and to
develop interdisciplinary encounters (Garnett 2020). These mechanisms
largely maintain the contours of industrial capitalism by prioritizing
market-driven solutions (Eisner 1993; Sabin 2021; Sinclair 1997). The
tools create abstractions of relations between natural resources, human
actions, and spatial configurations through technical experts'
representations (Lefebvre 1991; Loftus 2015). These abstractions
translate the lived experience of impacted residents into discrete
variables such as culpable chemical compounds, types of harm, and
inventories of offending sources (Fortun 2004; Hepler-Smith 2019). Such
classifications order social processes in ways that facilitate
administrative processes but, in turn, make invisible various other
forms of lived experiences and knowledge (Bowker and Star 1999). When
the community members at the Portside meeting in 2019 expressed a lack
of toxic air pollution data at a granular scale, they followed this
command-and-control approach to regulate the environment. This approach
gives little critical attention to *which* data regulators collect,
*when* they collect it, *how* this data informs technology-based
regulations, and what work lies outside of standard regulatory
practices.

As feminist technoscience and critical data science increasingly
interrogate the role of data and tools of abstraction to create and
maintain just futures (Costanza-Chock 2020; Dillon et al. 2019; Fortun
et al. 2016; Mah 2017; Taylor 2017; Vera et al. 2019), this article
conducts an intersectional feminist analysis of a specific kind of
variable common in many regulatory data practices: the data surrogate or
the proxy. Scientific and technical knowledge production routinely
relies on data surrogates to fill in for missing or immeasurable
information. Grounded in Portside, this article yokes feminist science
and technology studies (STS) and critical EJ scholarship to interrogate
how power circulates within the environmental regulatory regime's data
practices. Rather than dismissing the role of the data surrogate as an
incidental, intermediary, and abstracted stand-in for missing
information, an intersectional feminist technoscience and critical EJ
approach considers seriously the material and embodied nature of
surrogate work through the case of mediating environmental governance
and justice.

Foregrounding regulatory-regime-fueled EJ in more detail is imperative
for a feminist analysis of the material and embodied power of data
surrogates. In Portside, as in many other Latinx and Chicanx
neighborhoods in Southern California, as EJ scholars Laura Pulido, Ellen
Kohl, and Nicole-Marie Cotton (2016) and Eric Carter (2016) have found,
EJ groups and state agencies have historically attempted to work
together via the regulatory regime with varying effects. Similarly, EJ
activists in Portside range in their approach. Conservative activists
enter well-established pipelines between serving in prominent EJ groups
to holding positions in municipal government or as port commissioners
with the hopes of reforming the system; a handful of activists take a
more radical approach, organizing to shift the power of governance back
to communities. Residents stay legible to the state through their
service on various municipal and state EJ committees while sustaining
attempts to improve their scientific and technical understanding.
However, when state agencies commit to EJ within the regulatory regime,
various social groups find themselves at impasses that stem from
epistemological differences and incompatible frames (Benford 2005),
benchmarks and values (Halvorson 2021), and prestructured relations
between the state, market, and civil society (Betsill and Corell 2007;
Fox and Brown 1998).

### Dealing with Data Gaps

During such impasses, data-driven tools become mediators among social
groups. As a result, an epistemic dependence on representative and
accurate data challenges more radical forms of EJ. In turn, EJ becomes
tethered to the regulatory regime's standard portmanteau of tools in the
name of scientific proof, data collection, and technological control.
This portmanteau is rife with unmeasurable data and data gaps (Murphy
2013; Ottinger 2013; Shapiro, Roberts, and Zakariya 2017), which
technical experts fill in with data surrogates.

The technical literature about data surrogates presents them as
*substitutes*, demonstrating how certain unmeasurable or computationally
intensive measurements can be replaced with more readily available ones
or simulated data. In terms of data analysts, this data is either
simulated through the statistical method of *inference*, where missing
data is ascertained from an existing sampling distribution, or by
*imputation*, which is the process of predicting missing data. Such
processes aim to maintain performance by ensuring adequate size of data
sets. In air quality modeling, surrogates conflate categorical variables
such as descriptions of activities such as "construction" with numerical
ones such as "population." They disaggregate data by temporalizing,
speciating, and spatially allocating regional, area-wide emissions to a
more granular scale to describe offending locations (Adelman et al.
2015; Boulton et al. 2002; Li et al. 2021). This literature serves to
maintain the momentum of the production of scientific knowledge by
focusing on the computational mechanisms of fashioning one variable to
replace another (Forrester 2008) and best practices to develop
surrogates quicker (Boulton et al. 2002). In effect, substitutes are
fungible.

This treatment of fungibility, wherein one variable is considered
replaceable with another, with minimal consequence, however, is
deceptive. The supposed interchangeability of data surrogates masks the
distribution of power and participation between various social groups
through data operations. Technocrats use these operations to perform all
sorts of predictive functions that inform environmental policy and the
distribution of resources to vulnerable communities. For example, in
California's modeling to determine the economic impacts of new
environmental regulations using an input-output model, modelers proposed
using "household income" data as a surrogate for "ethnicity" when
ethnicity data was unavailable. This substitutive approach, while all
too common, encompasses serious risks. By abstracting the full range of
who does the work of data surrogacy, and the full scope of embodied and
affective work that data surrogates do, a substitutive approach flattens
structural issues, such as racism and the subversion of reproductive
labor, into computationally suitable categories like "race" (Chun 2021;
Pulido 2000) and "gender."

Critical EJ scholars also have argued against the collapse of
differences of race, class, gender, ability, nativism, and speciesism in
the broader EJ movement. Instead, they call for an intersectional
examination of how power and domination within dominant categories of
bureaucratic and administrative systems reproduce environmental
inequalities (Álvarez and Coolsaet 2020; Pellow and Brulle 2005; Pellow
2017). Political ecologists have disparaged the predominantly liberal
nature of the EJ movement that prioritizes the distribution of
environmental threats (Swyngedouw and Heynen 2003). However, a critical
approach to EJ combined with a feminist technoscience approach avoids
this trap by not merely focusing on liberal ideas of the redistribution
of environmental threats but also on robust recognition and
representation (Fraser 1990) of marginalized lives in environmental
struggles (Schlosberg 2007), by following intersecting systems of
oppression (Sze 2020). This critical approach should also extend to
examining the role of technical tools and data practices in mediating EJ
and regulation. As we will see in the Portside case, the assumed
fungibility of parameterized data impedes exposing forms of gendered and
racialized extraction and subjugation within the regulatory regime. This
exposure and the disaggregation of differences of what kinds of lived
experiences finds their way into governance technologies and who creates
it, with what visibilities, is vital to implementing just futures.

In the following section, I argue that data surrogates bridge the
predominantly parallel tracks of the tools of environmental governance
and critical EJ. In simplified terms, environmental governance focuses
on controlling environmental threats through market mechanisms and
technological solutions sanctioned by the state, and critical EJ on
multiscalar and multi-issue approaches to tackling social inequities
regarding the environment (Pellow 2017). Through the Portside case, I
suggest the concept of *hosting* to replace *substituting* to analyze
the work that data surrogates perform while filling in for data gaps and
abjected data*.* Here, I use *abjected* to refer to data that is
compromised, discarded, ejected, and refused (both in terms of phenomena
that refuse to be disciplined as data and the regulatory regime's
refusal to recognize the experiences of non-experts *as* data).^1^ This
analytical shift reveals guest-host relationships, either invited or
parasitic, which in turn distribute power, mediate cultural processes,
and materialize historical trajectories to produce environments.

While expositing the differences between substituting and hosting, I
align with intersectional feminist scholars who challenge technical
abstractions. Instead, they attend to relations between the body and
property (Hartman 1997; McKittrick 2006), placing the corporeality of
subjugated bodies at the center of social justice in the United States
(Pulido and De Lara 2018), grounded in sites of refusal of oppressive
systems that undermine life itself (Davis 1972; Weinbaum 2019). These
scholars consider the body-self relationships of those they observe and
of themselves, to produce accounts of "embodied data" (Ellingson 2017).
Further, this feminist interception is analogous to the vast and
generative feminist scholarship on "gestational surrogacy." The analogy
extends to how racialized and stratified forms of discrimination create
abstractions of bodies and/as property within market systems that
control reproduction (Vora 2012), commodifying reproductive work as a
"gendered afterlife of slavery" within systems of racial capitalism
(Weinbaum 2013, 438; Twine 2011) that implicates certain bodies into a
technological process of being cyborgs (Lewis 2019). Feminist analyses
of gestational surrogacy not only offer ways to interrogate how
repetitive labor is outsourced to robotic technologies (Atanasoski and
Vora 2015) but also, as I will argue, to the supposed fungibility within
data practices aimed at social justice. Questioning the supposed
fungibility of data surrogates interrogates the racial capitalist system
of market and command-and-control forces that constrain the choices and
consequences for certain bodies to participate within the regulatory
regime's data practices. Considering data surrogates as substitutes lead
to germinal questions posed by STS and media scholars about how proxy
wars produce network ties, predictions, and errors that reproduce
segregation and discrimination (Chun 2018, 2021). However, seriously
considering the non-fungibility of surrogates as hosts also reveals
opportunities to interrupt the hegemonic regulatory regime.

### Challenging Universalizing and Replaceable Abstractions: The Operations of Data Surrogates

Throughout my fieldwork in Portside, the regulatory regime's demand for
producing data out of environmental knowledge was unrelenting. An
intersectional feminist and critical EJ approach to examining the work
that data surrogates do to fill this demand and make regulatory
instruments usable reveals a partial typology of operations:
*calibrating, weighting,* and *validating.* These are routine and vital
operations in the emic---or culturally specific---practices of
scientific and technical experts to produce stand-ins for data gaps.
However, I show that in Portside, the actors and relationships that
perform these operations lie far beyond the domain and sites of
scientific and technological expertise. I draw attention to how the
regulatory regime's tools that rely on abstractions normalize the
gendered and racialized extraction of the surplus value (Robinson 2005;
Weinbaum 2019) of the work of a broader conceptualization of data
surrogates. I exposit and analyze these operations not merely to
document them but to highlight opportunities where alternative
epistemologies break through within and despite the existing regulatory
regime.

#### **Calibrating**

In technical practices of using sensors and monitors, calibrating
instruments is crucial to gather granular data. Calibration minimizes
error propagation by increasing data quality and usability. This
operation occurs at the sensor manufacturing factory, the laboratory,
and the field (Gao 2022; Giordano et al. 2021) and involves tuning the
outputs of sensors to reference monitors through methods like momentary
matching using drift detection algorithms and machine-learning models.
However, when it comes to EJ, calibrating to ensure usable, granular
data is performed in many more ways. At the 2019 community meeting in
Portside, participants debated where to place air pollution detection
monitors in their community's mixed-use industrial and residential zone.
Although under the optimistic aegis of AB 617 at the time, public
participation in air pollution monitoring had a long-standing and
fraught precedent in Portside. In 1999, as in 2019, regulatory monitors
focused on toxic emissions of industrial production processes. Back
then, a chrome-plating facility in Portside, Master Plating, became a
site of contention. The facility was emitting hexavalent chromium
(Cr~6~), a known carcinogen, but within levels permitted by the
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Environmental Health Hazard
Assessment, and APCD. The facility was in an area zoned as mixed-use
industrial and residential; it was compliant. The facility sat within
its property lines; it was compliant. As per local regulation, Master
Plating was equipped with fume suppressants as control technology, and
sensors did not pick up aberrant levels of Cr~6~ during production; the
facility was compliant. However, the residents' experience was
otherwise. Those co-located with the facility noted a spike in asthma
rates, particularly evidenced by a young boy who developed asthma within
a few months of moving into a house adjacent to Master Plating
(Environmental Health Coalition 2004).

Local activists and residents assumed the role of data surrogates to
fill in for what they were convinced were faulty or compromised sensor
readings. A local EJ group worked with residents and the state's
inspectors to add and reposition monitors to measure the facility's
emissions more accurately, at a whopping cost of \$1 million. Over the
next few weeks, by tuning into the times of day and days of week when
they sensed heightened emissions from the plating facility, the embodied
surrogates highlighted a problem of time of exposure that the standard
regulatory sensing practices missed. They noted that during
"housekeeping activities" of dusting and sweeping on Monday mornings,
settled, toxic particulate matter was re-suspended in the air as
"fugitive dust." This fugitive dust was not detected during the
regulatory inspections, and the fume suppressants within the production
line had little effect on them. Animated during "off hours" of
production, the detected hexavalent chrome was at times 175 times higher
than the statewide average (Murchison, Suer, and Cook 2003). After
multiple rounds of monitoring, CARB and APCD conceded to the residents
(Lee 2005), and the county finally filed an injunction to shut down the
chrome-plating facility.

The residents and activists participated in the recalibration of the
monitor-based sensor network in ways that far exceeded ensuring the
accuracy of a sensor compared to reference monitors (Ottinger 2010). In
effect, the broader recalibration work constitutes what the feminist and
postcolonial STS scholar Sandra Harding (1991) has called the "strong
objectivity" program. Strong objectivity upends illusions of "neutral"
objectivity institutionalized by dominant institutions of Western
science to instead value knowledge produced from various standpoints
that collectively produce something close to socially constructed
accuracy. This approach amends how the knowing body is made distant by
the "unregulated gluttony" and unrestricted vision of dominant
instruments (Haraway 1988, 581). Additionally, rather than a
statistically derived surrogate to *substitute* information about the
emissions in the facility during the hours that the monitors were not
collecting data, the specialized, embodied knowledge of the volunteers
exposed significant gaps in the protocols of regulatory sensing. These
embodied and sensorial labors filled in for missed data from inspectors
who ignored emissions outside the primary plating process. As a result
of this recalibration, CARB revised their statewide regulatory
requirements, included fugitive dust as a contributor to hexavalent
chromium emissions, and re-evaluated the sufficiency of fume
suppressants as a control mechanism (US EPA 2002). This outcome did not
result from merely technical calibrations.

Data surrogates are also calibrated to historical, place-based
precedents of environmental harm through sensory tunings. For example,
when a 40,000-ton, twenty-two-year-old amphibious US Navy assault ship,
the *Bonhomme Richard*, was set afire by a sailor in San Diego in 2020,
regulatory monitors failed to record adequate and timely data. The ship
blazed for four days, injured forty sailors and twenty-three civilians,
and polluted Portside. In the absence of "real-time" scientific data,
silence from the navy, jurisdictional confusion between agencies, and
slow official incident response, the collective calibrations of
residents generated surrogates for missing data to mobilize action.
Residents were alerted by "smelling that something was off" many hours
before statements from San Diego officials, rivaling the navy's claims
that all that was burning was "rags and paper." A National City
politician who had long championed EJ for people of color in Portside
exclaimed that the smell instantly transported her to another historical
fire at a wrecking yard in 1987. Then in elementary school, she and over
a thousand other schoolchildren were evacuated from their schools in
Portside. Calibrated to these smells and their gravity, she mobilized
action in her constituency thirty-three years later on the first whiff
of smelling a mix of burning rubber and paint. Calibrations thus bring
nonrepresentational ways of being tuned to the world to drive action
within sites beleaguered by struggles over power and knowledge
recognition.^2^ Portside members exposed to toxic pollutants were
calibrated to environments differently than how scientific tools are
tuned. In both the chrome plating case and the navy ship fire, specific
bodies challenged privileged knowledge from monitors' sensing mechanisms
to recalibrate what the regulatory regime senses, when, and by whom. In
effect, these surrogates were non-fungible.

#### **Weighting**

![](media/image2.png){width="4.93in" height="2.1in"}

Figure 1. Spatial allocation of emissions. Area-wide emissions are
allocated to geographically specific locations using weight values.
Diagram based on Adelman et al. 2015.

Data surrogates also perform the operation of weighting. Within
technical practices of air quality modelers, the weighting of surrogates
is a statistical operation to disaggregate emissions data. This is not a
straightforward process. In California's air pollution modeling, the
Atmospheric Modeling and Support Section of the Modeling and Meteorology
Branch at CARB uses the US Environmental Protection Agency's spatial
allocator tool combined with python scripts and modeling domains. They
create, maintain, and regularly update a list of over a hundred spatial
surrogates. Modelers provide vector data in shapefiles or raster
datasets comprised of geographic data objects in the form of points,
lines, or polygons (Adams and Adelman 2016). They then use this data to
assign weights to a surrogate to spatially allocate area-wide emissions
to potential sources (Boulton et al. 2002) since many emissions do not
emerge from point sources. In doing so, they define a relationship
between a data source of emissions and the geographic area to which
modelers allocate the emissions (see Figure 1). For every geographic
area of interest (GAI), n_GAI is the number of available data sources
such as monitor data and emission inventory data, and f_GAI is the i^th^
fraction within the GAI for a particular grid cell (i,j), which must
then sum to 1 (Σ, or sigma, refers to a sum function).

$$For\ GAI\  \in State,\sum_{i = 1}^{n\_ GAI}{{f\_ GAI}_{i} = 1}$$

However, unrecognized by the regulatory regime, a significant form of
weighting for disaggregation occurs outside such algorithms. The
inability of models and monitors to provide data at a granular scale can
hamstring the vital aggregation and disaggregation processes in standard
regulatory practices. As a result, I extend the operation of weighting
to explain the work of actors who unequally bear the burden of
collecting and providing more granular data. For instance, in Portside,
the San Diego APCD regularly enrolled "sensitive receptors" to do this
work. Sensitive receptor locations include schools and care centers for
children, the elderly, or the sick, who are at a higher risk of air
pollution harm. Over the past few decades, APCD has installed regulatory
monitors on these sites to collect data for better disaggregation of
regional emissions. As Kim Fortun (2004) has found, standardized
knowledge in the form of environmental information technologies like
chemical inventories is routinely used to undermine the experiences of
community members. In Portside, industry representatives often
downplayed the stories that sensitive receptors presented about children
or the elderly having high rates of asthma or other respiratory
conditions resulting from toxic Portside air as anecdotal or overblown
and joined the chorus to favor more "scientific data" instead. Thus, in
an EJ neighborhood, sensitive receptors not only disproportionately
experienced the harmful effects of pollutants but were also frequently
enlisted by the regulatory regime to perform vulnerability and bear the
responsibility to provide "scientific data."

The responsibility to generate scientific data for disaggregation often
came at material costs that lay behind the scenes of the regulatory
regime. Regulatory monitoring stations are often large trailers
installed atop concrete plinths. Their size is a factor of specialized
instruments to measure a variety of individual compounds or metals (NOx,
SOx, COx, lead, arsenic, etc.). Although AB 617 promises more granular
monitoring, commissioning, and maintaining regulatory stations is no
small task. This process includes establishing a memorandum of
understanding with the site, procuring construction and temporary
encroachment permits, obtaining an address for the trailer to access
power from the power company, and procuring a contract with a lab to
perform regular analyses of the data, all before building the station.
These steps are time intensive, expensive, and involve multi-agency
coordination. Once the monitor is up and running, district inspectors
must regularly maintain it. Only after the monitors have collected a few
years' worth of data can scientists observe usable patterns to inform
their responses to public concerns about the health impacts of exposure
to pollutants. All this time, the sensitive receptors must maintain the
trailer on their premises.

In Portside, the demands sensitive receptor locations faced to provide
uninterrupted data often had negative consequences. The presence of a
large regulatory monitoring station stymied the expansion plans of a
local elementary school. As the sole public school in the low-income
neighborhood of Barrio Logan, it needed to provide more room for grades
6 to 8 by placing portable classrooms on the property. To do so, the
school had to build on its recreational space, where the monitoring
station was also installed. While the school was eager to participate in
the sensing network and was committed to the health of its community, it
also had to contend with the fact that the station was taking up
valuable space. Notably, some school representatives also found the
station to be "ugly" and noisy. After ten years of monitoring at this
site, the San Diego Unified School District requested APCD to remove the
monitoring station in 2016. It was subsequently moved to another
elementary school a mile north. Regulatory officers perceived such
requests to decommission monitoring stations as uncooperative behavior.
Thus, when faced with missing or incomplete data, if calibrating exposes
issues with sensing, weighting brings to light how certain social groups
and their spaces unequally bear the burden to perform this sensitivity
for the larger good of their community by collecting data, at all costs,
for the unsatiable data needs of the regulatory regime.

#### **Validating**

In the technical practices of data modelers who simulate air pollution's
physical and chemical behaviors, validation is often used
interchangeably with verification or veracity. Pollution scientists
consider modeling and monitoring to be complementary; the model is
supposedly validated if a model matches observations of human
sense-perceptions or the readouts of monitoring networks. This emic
practice of gaining confidence in models through their validation is
called model performance evaluation. When the navy ship burned in
Portside at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the monitors running
in the vicinity failed to collect data from most of the accident because
of shifting winds and non-optimal placement. They were also unable to
provide data about the concentration and duration of the community's
exposure to chemical compounds, a combination of which was required for
experts to make useful assessments about the public health impacts of
the fire. APCD deployed additional canister sensors over the course of
the blaze. However, these sensors were unable to provide real-time data
since APCD had to send the canisters back to a lab for analysis
periodically. This left the residents, many of whom already suffer from
asthma and other respiratory conditions, distressed about latent health
impacts from this prolonged exposure. Later, amid rising pressure from
the residents for more information, APCD sought the help of CARB to
model the fire to fill in for missing data. However, these models were
inconclusive because they could not be validated by the monitors, which
had themselves been collecting deficient data. How, then, was data
validated?

STS scholars Naomi Oreskes Kristin Shrader-Frechette, and Kenneth Belitz
have suggested that the practice of validation is less about
verification and more about legitimation (1994, 642). Validation as a
form of legitimation indicates how the tools and methods of
environmental governance come to be trustworthy by nature of who creates
the tools, establishes their use, and circulates them. During both
business-as-usual times and urban anthropogenic accidents, the data
collection of the state through "socially recognized" and "officially
validated labor, carried out by salaried workers" (Illner 2020, 27)
regularly fails, exposing gaps in how the state's expertise is
legitimized. During the ship fire in Portside, residents collected their
own evidence in the absence of adequate, "official," and "expert" data.
Marcia (pseudonym), a long-time Chicana community organizer and primary
caregiver to her ailing husband, who had cancer and other respiratory
conditions, brought a filter to the first public meeting to discuss the
fire. She noted her shock at the amount of dark and fine particulate
matter, a particularly harmful air pollutant that can lodge itself into
lungs and the blood stream, deposited on the filter of her husband's
sleep-apnea-reliever machine in just one night. She exclaimed it
appeared as though she had not changed the filter in a year.

Evidence like Marcia's eventually mobilized action in the months that
followed. City representatives and health experts drew on the shared
experience of having witnessed this filter to discuss future
preparedness, maintain pressure on the navy for accountability, and
rally for reparative action. Amid residents' repeated impact statements
and circulation of visuals of the filter's evidence, the county
supervisor's office and the Port of San Diego released a total of
\$653,000 to provide over 250 pairs of indoor air purifiers and air
monitors to residents of Portside. During this anthropogenic accident,
when the stakes of missing data were higher for the local government
amid heightened demands for reparative action from Portside residents
and state officials, it was the unpaid, "non-legitimized," embodied and
affective labor of resident activists like Marcia that ultimately
validated the tools of the state, by filling in for its incapacities.
That the community continued to rally for more monitoring post-incident,
placing faith in these instruments to produce data, further highlights
that it is far more than the officially validated labor of the experts
who made their tools operational and legitimized.

Validating also occurred through institutional collaborations, when
academic institutions developed civic science projects within
communities most at risk of pollution, with the promise of filling gaps
in environmental pollution data. Rarely in need of proof of pollution
themselves, the residents joined forces with institutionally legitimized
researchers to conduct low-cost sensing with the hope of putting numbers
to their grievances that could conceivably incite political action.
While the assembled data of civic-sensing may invite new ways of making
sense of residents' collective encounters (Gabrys Pritchard, and Barratt
2016), it rarely gave vulnerable Portside members credence at regulatory
and policy tables. On the other hand, these joint efforts between
communities and academic scientists lent legitimacy to the work of
academic scientific partners. When I probed what these partnerships did
for the residents, an academic scientist working in San Diego noted that
the citizen-sensing project's success was that the data collected from
their partnership could validate the data of regulatory monitors or
commercial sensing networks. Rather than the sensors and models
validating the experiences of disadvantaged community members to lead to
regulation change, the opposite was true. The residents were data
surrogates who validated the status of models and monitors as reliable
epistemic tools of the experts and an empirically adequate one at that,
despite the tools' shortcomings.

### Moving from Substituting to Hosting: Deepening a Feminist Analysis of Data Surrogates 

So long as models, monitors, and inventories serve as lodestars of the
standard environmental regulatory regime, any attempt to develop more
justice-oriented policies within this regime must confront the problem
of missing, abjected, and immeasurable data and the use of surrogate
data to resolve it. These data practices are products of and reproduce
intersecting systems of oppression, by way of gatekeeping what counts
and data, and who it is produced by. Calibrating, weighting, and
validating are just a few examples of the work data surrogates do. This
paper has articulated what constitutes the broader range of data
surrogates involved in filling in data gaps to then facilitate or
interrupt the regulatory regime.

A feminist STS analysis of surrogates critiques the acts of speaking
for, standing-in, and representing bodies, sensory experiences, and
environments. It questions how computational technologies negotiate
human--machine relations, differences, and agency in ways that transform
social interactions (Suchman 2007), with specific attention to the
embodied and affective labors of marginalized people like indigenous
women who forge and maintain kinship relations with environments
routinely go ignored in the making of "rational science" (Harding 1991;
2008, 161). I build on the above research and more to conduct a situated
analysis of data surrogates. Data surrogates as substitutes rely on
environmental relations drawn together by computational and statistical
methods. These relationships build on the perceived universality of
technical abstractions and symbolic representations, like lines of code.
In this conception, a technical expert can swap out one discrete
variable for another within mathematical equations. However, feminist
scholarship teaches us that approximations such as surrogates do not
come without contest because they mediate power relations and knowledge
production (Hinterberger 2007).

Learning from the Portside case, I have suggested that the broader scope
of surrogates and their work is evident by shifting the terms of their
analysis from substituting to one of hosting. The former implies
fungibility, and the latter resists this implication. Hosting evades
solely working in terms of technical abstractions by focusing on
embodied, historically specific relationships in place (Massey 1994;
Mohanty 1988). Statistical operations of substitution in the regulatory
regime hide the forces of racial capitalism and the undermining of
gendered labor while maintaining the state's operations (Melamed 2011).
Hosting*,* on the other hand, accounts for sites where collective
subversion and resistance can arise (Ahmed 2010; Hartsock 1983) and
invisibilized labor and kinship relations recovered (Hayden 2013).
Surrogates in environmental management can have ethical and political
ramifications because they invoke that which is unknown or even
unknowable (Chun 2018; Murphy 2004). These approximations can substitute
one detrimental abstraction with another to sustain bureaucratic
management while doing little to alleviate toxic exposures for those
most disadvantaged (Hepler-Smith 2019). Thus, while the concept of
hosting does not make the data surrogate any less of a proxy, it does
draw attention to the gendered and racialized relationships between
body, place, and property in the regulatory regime that substitution
misses. Building on the Portside case, this section summarizes the ways
the above associations are embedded within and produced by hegemonic
regulatory systems.

Hosting locates surrogate data in *body and place*. Theorizing fungible
bodies, Saidiya Hartman argues in *Scenes of Subjection* that captive
slave bodies were made interchangeable, abstracted, and universalized
"empty vessel\[s\]" (1997, 21). This fungibility converted bodies into
property that extended the master's reach and dominion (46). Tiffany
King (2016) then theorizes how "Black fungibility" can serve as a way to
analyze the spatial reach of domination. These analyses of the
fungibility of subjugated bodies inform my argument that treating data
surrogates as fungible allows actors of the regulatory regime to
abstract historically specific material practices steeped in racial and
class-based tensions to make them into computationally tenable
parameters. Purely computational surrogates, in turn, expand the
regulatory regime's spatial and epistemic reach and dominance, under the
guise of state-sanctioned EJ programs. In contrast, in the hexavalent
chromium emissions case in Portside, the surrogation work of data was
performed by residents and volunteers. They served as corporeal hosts to
the pollutants in place. By "letting the \[subjugated\] body speak"
(Hartman 1997, 22), they highlighted the shortcomings of the regulatory
regime's inspection protocols. In the case of the navy ship fire, by
invoking the filter, Marcia asserted her caregiving role and the
presence of her husband's subjugated body riddled with cancer and asthma
into the patchy statistical data of municipal agents. Her evidence of
the filter interrupted the dominant data practices of the regulatory
regime. As a data surrogate, she was not fungible.

Hosting also reveals and interrupts how the regulatory regime constructs
*property systems and rights*. Environmental regulation creates property
rights of the air as a natural resource by converting open access to air
into public property that is then subject to private access (Cole 2002,
2011). The regulatory regime relies on the settler-colonial,
"line-drawing" method of boundary-making to demarcate public and private
property (Banner 2009) based on zoning laws and industrial permits, as
we saw in Portside. These abstractions reduce geographic territory and
the relations of bodies, land, and property to a spatial grid, as we saw
in the operations of weighting through spatial surrogates. Despite the
evasive nature of airborne matter that is hard to pin down (Choy 2018),
mappings to spatial grids perpetuate a false sense of "fixity and
stability" based on a sense of enclosure in the United States (Blomley
2003; Ellis 1993), rather than fluid constitutions (Massey 1994). Daniel
H. Cole and Elinor Ostrom (2010) have argued that regulatory resolutions
use these boundaries to discipline residents to attach favorable
relations towards property enclosures. It upholds one user's property
rights while imposing costs on others. Indigenous feminist scholars such
as Mishuana Goeman, on the other hand, have long resisted these fixities
of capitalist formations, where "life force becomes abstracted as
property" (2013, 205), instead considering lifeforms particular to place
(Goeman 2009) but also actively in transit through relations (Byrd
2011). As such, surrogate *as host* maps more than mathematical and
computational relationships of fungible land onto a gridded space. It
sheds light on the material nature of the politicized relationships
among points, lines, or polygons, and the bodies, land, and property
they encode. These relations lie far beyond abstracted demarcations of
zoning, property lines, and land-use types that are rendered in the
regulatory regime. In the case of hexavalent chromium emissions in
Portside, hosts interrupted the abstracted boundaries and enclosures
between public and private property when the life of disadvantaged
communities was at stake. Hosting thus shows the possibility of shifting
power of whose property rights are upheld in the regulatory regime's air
pollution management through regulation.

Together, data surrogates as hosts shifts focus from the realm of
production to that of *social reproduction*. Social reproduction
feminism explores the tensions between production and reproduction
within social configurations that involve property and power relations
(Federici 2012; Ginsburg et al. 1995; Laslett and Brenner 1989). Data
surrogates treated in terms of substituting within standard regulatory
practices typically focus on production processes. Hosting, on the other
hand, helps explain the entrenchment of these operations within the
realm of social reproduction, contributing to scholarship that theorizes
EJ *as* social reproduction (Di Chiro 2008). As shown above, operations
such as calibrating, weighting, and validating that stand in for data
gaps are performed by bodies in spaces associated with activities that
replicate human life or labor power at the level of homes,
neighborhoods, and communities at large. Marxist feminists explore the
everyday practices through which the reproduction of human life, labor
power, and care and kinship relations are integral to social
configurations of inequalities and capitalism itself (Bhattacharya 2017;
Ferguson 2019). Additionally, social reproduction is routinely performed
by gendered and racialized labor (Davis 1983); the same is evident in
data surrogates. Thus, although social reproduction is mired within a
capitalist system, it also holds the possibility for social
transformation by resisting and interrupting the capitalist regulatory
regime, as we see in Portside.

As states recede from the public provisioning of caregiving, healthcare,
education, and community development (Bakker 2007) required of EJ, data
surrogates fill in vital operations. Examining these operations in terms
of hosting exposes the material commitments imposed on
more-than-computational surrogates, the sites of exploiting racialized,
gendered, and non-expert labor, and the ways sensorial and corporeal
surrogates resist this exploitation. In Portside, surrogates as hosts
interrupt relations of power attributed to race, class, and gender in EJ
that are embedded in scientific and technical categories and tools. In
other words, they interrupt the "racial regime" (Robinson 2012) and
gender oppression of the regulatory regime. Hosting reveals the
specificities of these relationships, challenges the assumptions of the
work of data surrogates in standard governance, and, more crucially,
points to the potential for rethinking the organization of social
relations.

### Conclusion 

An intersectional feminist STS and critical EJ analysis of data
surrogates demonstrates their ability to interrupt and potentially
cleave away from the dominant regulatory regime. In effect, it opposes
the dominant regime\'s state-sanctioned racial and gendered violence
(Liboiron, Tironi, and Calvillo 2018; Murphy 2017; Pulido 2017). This
article has argued that while data surrogates are also proxies, their
work is better analyzed in terms of hosting rather than substituting*.*
This shift exposes the dynamics of how data surrogates are grounded in
body, place, and property relations*.* Hosting draws attention to the
politics of who bears the burden to fuel the Sisyphean call for *more
data,* onto which the regulatory regime grafts policies, programs, and
regulations. Through the case of environmental regulation in the
Portside Environmental Justice Neighborhoods (Portside) of San Diego, I
have developed a partial typology of operations that data surrogates
perform: calibrating, weighting, and validating*.* My goal of drawing
out the relations between missing, unmeasurable, and abjected data, and
body, place, and property, is not merely to describe the historically
specific and material nature of seemingly fungible abstractions through
hosting but to instead explain and analyze how hosts can interrupt the
socioecological organization of the regulatory regime. As the state,
market, and civil society continue to iterate relations that promise EJ,
these reorganizational peregrinations of hosting reveal a subaltern and
subjugated politics of the data surrogate.

### Notes 

^1^ Abjection is a central concept in Black feminist literature
referring to the othering of entire populations in the service of
capitalism through slavery and other forms of subjection. I'm
particularly drawing from the conceptualizations of Saidiya Hartman
(1997) and Jodi A. Byrd (2011). The abject is effectively bereft of
subject-object relations with recognizable power.

^2^ Anthropologists have theorized nonrepresentational ways of relating
with environments through affect and attachment. Kathleen Stewart has
developed the concept of "attunements" to attend to forms of perceptual
awareness (Stewart 2011, 446). Atmospheric attunements through
"conditions of suspension" (Choy and Zee 2015, 213) attend to how expert
forms of sensing parse through phase-changes of particles.

### References

Adams, Liz, and Zach Adelman. 2016. "CMAS Spatial Allocator User's
Manual." CMAS Center. <https://github.com/CMASCenter/Spatial-Allocator>.

Adelman, Z., B. Naess, M. Omary, L. Ran, A. Bar-Ilan, T. Shah, R. Mason,
et al. 2015. "Recent Updates to Spatial Surrogates for Modeling U.S.
Emissions Sources." PowerPoint slides from presentation at the 21st
International Emission Inventory Conference, April 14--16, 2015, San
Diego, CA.
<https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-09/documents/adelman_pres.pdf>.

Ahmed, Sara. 2010. *Differences That Matter: Feminist Theory and
Postmodernism*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Álvarez, Lina, and Brendan Coolsaet. 2020. "Decolonizing Environmental
Justice Studies: A Latin American Perspective." *Capitalism Nature
Socialism* 31 (2): 50--69.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2018.1558272>.

Atanasoski, Neda, and Kalindi Vora. 2015. "Surrogate Humanity: Posthuman
Networks and the (Racialized) Obsolescence of Labor." *Catalyst:
Feminism, Theory, Technoscience* 1 (1): 1--40.
<https://doi.org/10.28968/cftt.v1i1.28809>.

Bakker, Isabella. 2007. "Social Reproduction and the Constitution of a
Gendered Political Economy." *New Political Economy* 12 (4): 541--56.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13563460701661561>.

Banner, Stuart. 2009. *Who Owns the Sky? The Struggle to Control
Airspace from the Wright Brothers On*. MA: Harvard University Press.

Beck, Ulrich. 1992. *Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity*. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage Publications.

Benford, Robert. 2005. "The Half-Life of the Environmental Justice
Frame: Innovation, Diffusion, and Stagnation." In *Power, Justice, and
the Environment: A Critical Appraisal of the Environmental Justice
Movement*, edited by David Naguib Pellow and Robert J. Brulle, 37--53.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Betsill, Michele M., and Elisabeth Corell, eds. 2007. *NGO Diplomacy:
The Influence of Nongovernmental Organizations in International
Environmental Negotiations*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bhattacharya, Tithi. 2017. *Social Reproduction Theory: Remapping Class,
Recentering Oppression*. London: Pluto Press.

Blomley, Nicholas. 2003. "Law, Property, and the Geography of Violence:
The Frontier, the Survey, and the Grid." *Annals of the Association of
American Geographers* 93 (1): 121--41.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8306.93109>.

Boulton, J. Wayne, Kristofer A Siriunas, Mike Lepage, and Stephanie
Schill. 2002. "Developing Spatial Surrogates for Modelling
Applications." Presented at the 11th Annual Emissions Inventory
Conference, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, April.
<https://gaftp.epa.gov/Air/nei/ei_conference/EI11/modeling/boulton.pdf>.

Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 1999. *Sorting Things Out:
Classification and Its Consequences*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bullard, Robert D. 2000. *Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and
Environmental Quality*. 3rd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Byrd, Jodi A. 2011. *The Transit of Empire: Indigenous Critiques of
Colonialism*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Carter, Eric D. 2016. "Environmental Justice 2.0: New Latino
Environmentalism in Los Angeles." *Local Environment* 21 (1): 3--23.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2014.912622>.

Choy, Timothy. 2018. "Tending to Suspension." *Social Analysis* 62 (4):
54--77. <https://doi.org/10.3167/sa.2018.620404>.

Choy, Timothy, and Jerry Zee. 2015. "Condition---Suspension." *Cultural
Anthropology* 30 (2): 210--23. <https://doi.org/10.14506/ca30.2.04>.

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. 2018. "On Patterns and Proxies, or the Perils of
Reconstructing the Unknown." September 25, 2018.
<https://www.e-flux.com/architecture/accumulation/212275/on-patterns-and-proxies/>.

Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. 2021. *Discriminating Data: Correlation,
Neighborhoods, and the New Politics of Recognition*. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Cole, Daniel H. 2002. *Pollution and Property: Comparing Ownership
Institutions for Environmental Protection*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Cole, Daniel H. 2011. "Property Creation by Regulation: Rights to Clean
Air and Rights to Pollute." In *Property in Land and Other Resources*,
edited by Daniel H. Cole and Elinor Ostrom, 125--54. Cambridge, MA:
Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

Cole, Daniel H., and Elinor Ostrom. 2010. "The Variety of Property
Systems and Rights in Natural Resources." Indiana--Bloomington School of
Public & Environmental Affairs Research Paper no. 2010-08-01.
<http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=1656418>.

Costanza-Chock, Sasha. 2020. *Design Justice: Community-Led Practices to
Build the Worlds We Need*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Davis, Angela. 1972. "Reflections on the Black Woman's Role in the
Community of Slaves." *Massachusetts Review* 13 (1/2): 81--100.
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/25088201>.

Davis, Angela. 1983. *Women, Race & Class*. 1st Vintage books edition.
New York: Vintage Books.

Di Chiro, Giovanna. 2008. "Living Environmentalisms: Coalition Politics,
Social Reproduction, and Environmental Justice." *Environmental
Politics* 17 (2): 276--98. <https://doi.org/10.1080/09644010801936230>.

Dillon, Lindsey, Rebecca Lave, Becky Mansfield, Sara Wylie, Nicholas
Shapiro, Anita Say Chan, and Michelle Murphy. 2019. "Situating Data in a
Trumpian Era: The Environmental Data and Governance Initiative." *Annals
of the American Association of Geographers* 109 (2): 545--55.
<https://doi.org/1tt0.1080/24694452.2018.1511410>.

Edwards, Paul N. 2010. *A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data,
and the Politics of Global Warming*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Eisner, Marc Allen. 1993. *Regulatory Politics in Transition*.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Ellingson, Laura L. 2017. "Textual Bodies: Creating Embodied Data." In
*Embodiment in Qualitative Research*, 124--46. New York: Routledge.
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315105277-7>.

Ellis, Reuben J. 1993. "The American Frontier and the Contemporary Real
Estate Advertising Magazine." *Journal of Popular Culture* 27 (3):
119--33. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-3840.1993.00119.x>.

Environmental Health Coalition. 2004. "The Science of Precaution: Barrio
Logan Residents Use Research and Land Use Planning to Prevent Harm."
*Race, Poverty & the Environment* 11 (2): 53--55.
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/41554464>.

Federici, Silvia. 2012. *Revolution at Point Zero: Housework,
Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle*. Oakland, CA: Common Notions/PM
Press.

Ferguson, Susan. 2019. *Women and Work: Feminism, Labour, and Social
Reproduction*. London: Pluto Press.

Forrester, Alexander. 2008. *Engineering Design via Surrogate Modelling:
A Practical Guide*. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Fortun, Kim. 2004. "Environmental Information Systems as Appropriate
Technology." *Design Issues* 20 (3): 54--65.
<https://doi.org/10.1162/0747936041423217>.

Fortun, Kim. 2012. "Biopolitics and the Informating of
Environmentalism." In *Lively Capital: Biotechnologies, Ethics, and
Governance in Global Markets*, edited by Kaushik Sunder Rajan. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press. <https://doi.org/10.1215/9780822393306-011>.

Fortun, Kim, Lindsay Poirier, Alli Morgan, Brandon Costelloe-Kuehn, and
Mike Fortun. 2016. "Pushback: Critical Data Designers and Pollution
Politics." *Big Data & Society* 3 (2).
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716668903>.

Fox, Jonathan A., and Lloyd David Brown. 1998. *The Struggle for
Accountability: The World Bank, NGOs, and Grassroots Movements*.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

Fraser, Nancy. 1990. "Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to
the Critique of Actually Existing Democracy." *Social Text*, no. 25/26,
56--80. <https://doi.org/10.2307/466240>.

Gabrys, Jennifer, Helen Pritchard, and Benjamin Barratt. 2016. "Just
Good Enough Data: Figuring Data Citizenships through Air Pollution
Sensing and Data Stories." *Big Data & Society* 3 (2).
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716679677>.

Gao, Meiling. 2022. "Low Cost Air Quality Sensor Challenges and Hopes."
Plenary lecture presented at the Air Sensors International Conference,
May 11, 2022. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJKm5tdJrA8>.

Garnett, Emma. 2020. "Breathing Spaces: Modelling Exposure in Air
Pollution Science." *Body & Society* 26 (2): 55--78.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X20902529>.

Ginsburg, Faye D., Rayna Rapp, Rayna R. Reiter, and Rayna Rapp. 1995.
*Conceiving the New World Order: The Global Politics of Reproduction*.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Giordano, Michael R., Carl Malings, Spyros N. Pandis, Albert A. Presto,
V.F. McNeill, Daniel M. Westervelt, Matthias Beekmann, and R.
Subramanian. 2021. "From Low-Cost Sensors to High-Quality Data: A
Summary of Challenges and Best Practices for Effectively Calibrating
Low-Cost Particulate Matter Mass Sensors." *Journal of Aerosol Science*
158 (November): 105833.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaerosci.2021.105833>.

Goeman, Mishuana. 2009. "Notes toward a Native Feminism's Spatial
Practice." *Wicazo Sa Review* 24 (2): 169--87.
<https://doi.org/10.1353/wic.0.0040>.

Goeman, Mishuana. 2013. *Mark My Words: Native Women Mapping Our
Nations*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Halvorson, Charles. 2021. *Valuing Clean Air: The EPA and the Economics
of Environmental Protection*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Haraway, Donna. 1988. "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in
Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective." *Feminist Studies*
14 (3): 575--99. <https://doi.org/10.2307/3178066>.

Harding, Sandra. 1991. *Whose Science? Whose Knowledge?: Thinking from
Women's Lives*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Harding, Sandra. 2008. *Sciences from Below: Feminisms,
Postcolonialities, and Modernities*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Hartman, Saidiya V. 1997. *Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and
Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century America*. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Hartsock, Nancy C. M. 1983. "The Feminist Standpoint: Developing the
Ground for a Specifically Feminist Historical Materialism." In
*Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology,
Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science*, edited by Sandra
Harding and Merrill B. Hintikka, 283--310. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands. <https://doi.org/10.1007/0-306-48017-4_15>.

Hayden, Cori. 2013. "Distinctively Similar: A Generic Problem Symposium:
Brand New World: Distinguishing Oneself in the Global Flow." *UC Davis
Law Review* 47 (2): 601--32.

Hepler-Smith, Evan. 2019. "Molecular Bureaucracy: Toxicological
Information and Environmental Protection." *Environmental History* 24
(3): 534--60. <https://doi.org/10.1093/envhis/emy134>.

Hinterberger, Amy. 2007. "Feminism and the Politics of Representation:
Towards a Critical and Ethical Encounter with 'Others.'" *Journal of
International Women's Studies* 8 (2): 74--83.
[https://vc.bridgew.edu/jiws/vol8/iss2/7](https://vc.bridgew.edu/jiws/vol8/iss2/7/).

Illner, Peer. 2020. *Disasters and Social Reproduction: Crisis Response
between the State and Community*. London: Pluto Press.

King, Tiffany Lethabo. 2016. "The Labor of (Re)Reading Plantation
Landscapes Fungible(Ly)." *Antipode* 48 (4): 1022--39.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12227>.

Laslett, Barbara, and Johanna Brenner. 1989. "Gender and Social
Reproduction: Historical Perspectives." *Annual Review of Sociology* 15
(1): 381--404. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.so.15.080189.002121>.

Lee, Charles. 2005. "Collaborative Models to Achieve Environmental
Justice and Healthy Communities." In *Power, Justice, and the
Environment: A Critical Appraisal of the Environmental Justice
Movement*, edited by David Naguib Pellow and Robert J. Brulle, 219-249.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lefebvre, Henri. 1991. *The Production of Space*. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing.

Levi-Faur, David. 2011. "Regulation and Regulatory Governance." In
*Handbook on the Politics of Regulation*, edited by David Levi-Faur.
Edward Elgar Publishing.
<https://ideas.repec.org/h/elg/eechap/13210_1.html>.

Lewis, Sophie. 2019. "Surrogacy as Feminism: The Philanthrocapitalist
Framing of Contract Pregnancy." *Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies*
40 (1): 1--38.
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5250/fronjwomestud.40.issue-1>.

Li, Yiting, Caroline Rodier, Jeremy D. Lea, John Harvey, and Michael J.
Kleeman. 2021. "Improving Spatial Surrogates for Area Source Emissions
Inventories in California." *Atmospheric Environment* 247 (February 21).
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117665>.

Liboiron, Max. 2021. *Pollution Is Colonialism*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Liboiron, Max, Manuel Tironi, and Nerea Calvillo. 2018. "Toxic Politics:
Acting in a Permanently Polluted World." *Social Studies of Science* 48
(3): 331--49. <https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312718783087>.

Loftus, Alex. 2015. "Violent Geographical Abstractions." *Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space* 33 (2): 366--81.
<https://doi.org/10.1068/d14120p>.

Mah, Alice. 2017. "Environmental Justice in the Age of Big Data:
Challenging Toxic Blind Spots of Voice, Speed, and Expertise."
*Environmental Sociology* 3 (2): 122--33.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/23251042.2016.1220849>.

Massey, Doreen. 1994. *Space, Place, and Gender*. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

McKittrick, Katherine. 2006. *Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the
Cartographies of Struggle*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Melamed, Jodi. 2011. *Represent and Destroy: Rationalizing Violence in
the New Racial Capitalism*. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Miller, Clark A., and Paul N. Edwards, eds. 2001. *Changing the
Atmosphere: Expert Knowledge and Environmental Governance*. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 1988. "Under Western Eyes: Feminist
Scholarship and Colonial Discourses." *Feminist Review* 30 (Autumn):
61--88. <https://doi.org/10.2307/1395054>.

Murchison, Linda, Carolyn Suer, and Jeff Cook. 2003. "Neighborhood Scale
Monitoring in Barrio Logan." In *Proceedings of the 96th Annual
Conference & Exhibition of the A&WMA, San Diego, California*": Paper
#70255, Pittsburgh, PA: Air & Waste Management Association.

Murphy, Michelle. 2004. "Uncertain Exposures and the Privilege of
Imperception: Activist Scientists and Race at the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency." *Osiris*, no. 19, 266--82.
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/3655244>.

Murphy, Michelle. 2013. "Chemical Infrastructures of the St Clair
River." In *Toxicants, Health and Regulation since 1945*, edited by
Soraya Boudia and Nathalie Jas, 103--16. London: Pickering & Chatto.

Murphy, Michelle. 2017. *The Economization of Life*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Oreskes, Naomi, Kristin Shrader-Frechette, and Kenneth Belitz. 1994.
"Verification, Validation, and Confirmation of Numerical Models in the
Earth Sciences." *Science, New Series* 263 (5147): 641--46.
<https://www.doi.org/10.1126/science.263.5147.641>.

Ottinger, Gwen. 2010. "Buckets of Resistance: Standards and the
Effectiveness of Citizen Science." *Science, Technology, & Human Values*
35 (2): 244--70. <https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243909337121>.

Ottinger, Gwen. 2013. *Refining Expertise: How Responsible Engineers
Subvert Environmental Justice Challenges*. New York: NYU Press.

Pellow, David Naguib. 2017. *What Is Critical Environmental Justice?*
New York: Wiley.

Pellow, David Naguib, and Robert J. Brulle, eds. 2005. *Power, Justice,
and the Environment: A Critical Appraisal of the Environmental Justice
Movement*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Porter, Theodore M. 1992. "Quantification and the Accounting Ideal in
Science." *Social Studies of Science* 22 (4): 633--51.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/030631292022004004>.

Porter, Theodore M. 1996. *Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity
in Science and Public Life*. Reprint edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Pulido, Laura. 2000. "Rethinking Environmental Racism: White Privilege
and Urban Development in Southern California." *Annals of the
Association of American Geographers* 90 (1): 12--40.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/0004-5608.00182>.

Pulido, Laura. 2017. "Geographies of Race and Ethnicity II:
Environmental Racism, Racial Capitalism and State-Sanctioned Violence."
*Progress in Human Geography* 41 (4): 524--33.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132516646495>.

Pulido, Laura, and Juan De Lara. 2018. "Reimagining 'Justice' in
Environmental Justice: Radical Ecologies, Decolonial Thought, and the
Black Radical Tradition." *Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space*
1 (1--2): 76--98. <https://doi.org/10.1177/2514848618770363>.

Pulido, Laura, Ellen Kohl, and Nicole-Marie Cotton. 2016. "State
Regulation and Environmental Justice: The Need for Strategy
Reassessment." *Capitalism Nature Socialism* 27 (2): 12--31.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2016.1146782>.

Robinson, Cedric J. 2005. *Black Marxism: The Making of the Black
Radical Tradition*. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Robinson, Cedric J. 2012. *Forgeries of Memory and Meaning: Blacks and
the Regimes of Race in American Theater and Film before World War II*.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Sabin, Paul. 2021. *Public Citizens: The Attack on Big Government and
the Remaking of American Liberalism*. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

Schlosberg, David. 2007. *Defining Environmental Justice: Theories,
Movements, and Nature*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shapiro, Nicholas, Jody Roberts, and Nasser Zakariya. 2017. "A Wary
Alliance: From Enumerating the Environment to Inviting Apprehension."
*Engaging Science, Technology, and Society* 3 (September): 575--602.
<https://doi.org/10.17351/ests2017.133>.

Sinclair, Darren. 1997. "Self-Regulation Versus Command and Control?
Beyond False Dichotomies." *Law & Policy* 19 (4): 529--59.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9930.00037>.

Stewart, Kathleen. 2011. "Atmospheric Attunements." *Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space* 29 (3): 445--53.
<https://doi.org/10.1068/d9109>.

Suchman, Lucy. 2007. "Feminist STS and the Sciences of the Artificial."
In *The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies*, edited by Edward J.
Hackett, Adele E. Clarke, Olga Amsterdamska, Michael E. Lynch, Judy
Wajcman, Sergio Sismondo, Wiebe E. Bijker, Stephen Turner, Charles
Thorpe, and Bruno Latour, 139--63. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Swyngedouw, Erik, and Nikolas C. Heynen. 2003. "Urban Political Ecology,
Justice and the Politics of Scale." *Antipode* 35 (5): 898--918.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2003.00364.x>.

Sze, Julie. 2020. *Environmental Justice in a Moment of Danger*.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Taylor, Linnet. 2017. "What Is Data Justice? The Case for Connecting
Digital Rights and Freedoms Globally." *Big Data & Society* 4 (2).
<https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951717736335>.

Twine, France Winddance. 2011. *Outsourcing the Womb: Race, Class, and
Gestational Surrogacy in a Global Market*, France Winddance Twine.
Framing 21st Century Social Issues. New York, NY: Routledge.

US EPA. 2002. "Region/ORD/OAR Workshop on Air Toxics Exposure
Assessment." Summary. San Francisco, CA.

Vera, Lourdes A., Dawn Walker, Michelle Murphy, Becky Mansfield, Ladan
Mohamed Siad, Jessica Ogden, and EDGI. 2019. "When Data Justice and
Environmental Justice Meet: Formulating a Response to Extractive Logic
through Environmental Data Justice." *Information, Communication &
Society* 22 (7): 1012--28.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2019.1596293>.

Vora, Kalindi. 2012. "Limits of 'Labor': Accounting for Affect and the
Biological in Transnational Surrogacy and Service Work." *South Atlantic
Quarterly* 111 (4): 681--700.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-1724138>.

Weinbaum, Alys Eve. 2013. "Gendering the General Strike: W. E. B. Du
Bois's *Black Reconstruction* and Black Feminism's 'Propaganda of
History.'" *South Atlantic Quarterly* 112 (3): 437--63.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-2146395>.

Weinbaum, Alys Eve. 2019. *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery:
Biocapitalism and Black Feminism's Philosophy of History*. Illustrated
ed. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

### Author Bio

**Akshita Sivakumar** is a PhD Candidate in Communication and Science
Studies at the University of California, San Diego, and has a background
in architecture and design.
