#  ![](media/rId20.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

## Book Review \| *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery: Biocapitalism and Black Feminism's Philosophy of History*, by Alys Eve Weinbaum (Duke University Press, 2019)

Daisy Deomampo

Fordham University

ddeomampo@fordham.edu

### 

Over the four past decades, reproductive technologies have been subject
to numerous social scientific, historical, legal, and bioethical
examinations. In *The Afterlife of Reproductive Slavery: Biocapitalism
and Black Feminism's Philosophy of History*, Alys Eve Weinbaum brings a
literary studies perspective to this scholarship, making critical
contributions by centering Black feminist perspectives and building on
the intertwined histories of slavery and capitalism. Building on Saidiya
Hartman's conceptualization of the afterlife of slavery, Weinbaum aims
to illustrate the ways in which slavery "has a specifically reproductive
afterlife" (1). Building on a feminist interest in reproductive justice
issues and antiracism, Weinbaum develops a complex argument that
outlines how human reproduction---and specifically the forms of
devaluation and extraction that accompany it---become conceivable.

A cultural theorist and professor of English, Weinbaum uses a range of
cultural texts, mainly creative works such as novels and films, which
she treats as works of philosophy in order to develop a Black feminist
philosophy of history. Weinbaum conducts what she calls a "critical
speculative engagement" with the afterlife of reproductive slavery in
each of these sources, arguing that such an engagement is both
"methodologically useful and politically necessary" (15). In so doing,
Weinbaum develops her argument that human biological commodities are
required to maintain biocapitalism; in other words, analyses of
commodification processes (in particular, where human biological life is
concerned) must be anchored in the history of slave breeding in the
Americas and the Caribbean.

Through her "critical speculation" of literary and creative works,
Weinbaum argues that it is the "slave episteme" that makes biocapitalism
possible: the slave episteme is central to biocapitalist processes and
is what makes biocapitalism work. Weinbaum tracks the apparatus of the
slave episteme, a "thought system" through which slavery endures, formed
by what Hartman calls "a racial calculus and a political arithmetic"
(1). Put differently, the slave episteme renders reproductive slavery
thinkable; it is the thought system that endures from the antebellum
period to the present moment. Importantly, it moves alongside capitalism
and illustrates how wombs come to be viewed as commodity sources.
Chattel slavery, for instance, relied on Black women's wombs as a source
of commodities; in the contemporary moment, this thought system renders
conceivable the use of women's wombs in the context of surrogacy and
assisted reproductive technologies. As Weinbaum argues, these are the
two main periods in modern history during which reproductive labor power
has been used for profit, and the slave episteme enables the ongoing
gendered and racialized exploitation of human reproductive labor.

The book's argument unfolds in two parts. In the first part (Chapters 1,
2, and 3), Weinbaum "tracks the slave episteme in black feminist texts
that highlight the reproductive dimensions of slavery" (15). Through
examinations of historical and feminist scholarship on surrogacy and
critical readings of Black women's neo-slave narratives---the most
famous of which is Toni Morrison's *Beloved*---Weinbaum argues that
these neo-slave narratives, when read alongside Black feminist
nonfiction, shed light on questions of reproductive extraction and
reproductive insurgency in slavery.

The second half of the book (Chapters 4, 5, and the Epilogue) offer a
thorough reading of speculative fiction that reveals the relationship
between reproduction of the current moment and slavery. Weinbaum
analyzes texts and films as diverse as Kazuo Ishiguro's *Never Let Me
Go*, works such as *Kindred*, *Wild Seed*, and others by Octavia Butler,
and filmmaker Alfonso Cuar√≥n's *The Children of Men*. Importantly, in
assembling these works that might not otherwise be taken together,
Weinbaum illustrates the workings of the slave episteme, unfolding how
the texts in question---which do not explicitly treat racial
slavery---demonstrate the relationship between the slave-breeding past
and the contemporary moment.

In centering cultural texts and literary works in her analysis of
slavery and its reproductive afterlife (what Weinbaum calls *critical
speculative engagement*), Weinbaum emphasizes that her focus on
*imagination* is worth considering because it influences, transforms,
and shapes understandings of reproductive politics and cultures, as well
as the reproductive practices in which we take part. In doing so,
Weinbaum offers a compelling account of how we arrived at the point at
which a person's in vivo reproductive labor can be extracted and sold
for profit. A meditation on the past as much as it is on the present,
the book illuminates how both slavery and contemporary reproductive
technologies are both racializing processes that produce commodities.
Perhaps a key contribution of the book is its emphasis on Black feminist
approaches to these questions in order to connect the slave past to the
contemporary moment.

Weinbaum acknowledges the contributions of empirical researchers at the
outset of her book, noting that the work of social scientists has been
crucial the development of her argument. For Weinbaum, however,
empirical approaches are less able to follow the work of the slave
episteme than works of creative imagination. Ethnographers may take
issue with such stances, not because of a deference to that which is
empirically verifiable, but because empirical and ethnographic studies
shed light on the sometimes messy specificity of people's everyday
lives---cultural, social, and political economic contexts that
inevitably influence and are influenced by thought systems and
ideologies. Weinbaum does acknowledge that it is beyond the scope of her
book to conduct a comparative study of US surrogacy and Indian
surrogacy, for example, and that the slave episteme is certainly "not
the only episteme that is set to work when surrogacy is outsourced"
(59). Nonetheless, as Weinbaum seems to want to extrapolate the slave
episteme to any context in which surrogacy is practiced, readers may be
left wanting for some analysis of how diverse thought systems may
coalesce in wide geographical and historical contexts to create
particular understandings of commodified reproductive labor.

Stylistically, the book may be unsatisfying for readers seeking greater
clarity and accessibility, due to its dense and often obfuscating prose.
Nonetheless, the book offers much-needed critical perspectives on the
racializing processes at the center of reproductive labor and
commodification. It also corrects a long-standing need to center Black
feminist scholarship in studies of the Black radical tradition.
Ultimately, Weinbaum's analysis shows the importance of thinking
historically and offers insights into the ways in which gendered,
racialized, and sexualized forms of oppression that have roots in
slavery continue to motivate biocapitalism today.

### Author Bio

**Daisy Deomampo** is Associate Professor of Anthropology at Fordham
University. She is the author of *Transnational Reproduction: Race,
Kinship, and Commercial Surrogacy in India* (NYU Press, 2016).
