#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

## Book Review \| *What Comes after Entanglement?:Â Activism, Anthropocentrism, and an Ethics of Exclusion*, by Eva Haifa Giraud (Duke University Press, 2019)

Zsuzsanna Ihar

University of Cambridge

zdi20@cam.ac.uk

### 

An increasing number of scholars are attempting to highlight relations
between peoples, worlds, knowledges, and ecologies that endure in spite
of state and corporate attempts to alienate and sever. This has been
particularly so in fields such as anthropology, gender and cultural
studies, and environmental humanities, where a focus on creative
pedagogies and practice has enabled thinkers to engage with \"life on
the inside of the webs and patterns of connection\" (Rose 2013, 93). The
recent emergence of "multispecies ethnography" (Kirksey and Helmreich
2010) is perhaps the best example of this commitment to highlighting
both the enmeshment of human and more-than-human life, as well as the
complex bonds of cooperation, togetherness, and shared experience
between species. However, as Eva Haifa Giraud demonstrates,
entanglements also come with certain exclusions and expulsions.

In *What Comes after Entanglement?* Giraud hones in on a trickier set of
relations, with the author paying careful attention to the \"entities,
practices, and ways of being\" foreclosed when \"other entangled
realities are materialized\" (2). She highlights the paradoxical nature
of relations, noting that attempts at collective encounter and scenes of
assemblage are more often than not reliant on the establishment of
purposeful barriers, boundary lines, and fissures---despite the initial
insistence on commensurability and indiscriminate co-existence. For
Giraud, deliberate acts of detachment and distancing become
\"ethico-political practices\" (17), capable of enticing alternative
visions of community, whilst also contesting liberal-humanist orderings
of life. Like all non-innocent forms of doing, sometimes these
exclusions deliberately destroy existing entanglements so that new
desires, embodiments, and futurities can come into play. Ultimately, by
drawing on a distinct feminist materialist lineage---think Donna Haraway
(2003) and Karen Barad (2007)---the author shifts away from simply
naming the practices and realities marginalized by given sociotechnical
arrangements. Instead, Giraud posits that exclusion is a key site where
\"agency is distributed and responsibility needs to be taken\" (181).

The book is structured as six chapters, moving chronologically across
interrelated instances of anti-capitalist, animal, and environmental
activism (from the 1980s to the present day). Starting with the McLibel
trial of the mid-1990s, which saw McDonald's suing two activists, Helen
Steel and Dave Morris, for distributing a detailed fact sheet critical
of industry practices, Chapter 1 brings to the fore the \"everyday
exclusions and processes of marginalization\" (25) that enable late
capitalism\'s infrastructural arrangements to appear seamless, natural,
and effortless. The chapter also traces the manner in which particular
legal apparatuses, financial liabilities, and media ecologies curtail
the emergence of \"radical-participatory communicative tactics\" (25)
among activist groups---particularly as they seek a more expansive
international platform. In the latter part of the chapter, Giraud
attends to the difficulties that arise when movements shift from
single-issue politics to more ambitious articulations of relation. As
platforms interlink, slogans cross-pollinate, and stories go viral,
Giraud warns of seemingly frictionless solidarities and common desires,
stressing that any sort of relation, however well-intentioned and
solicitous, is capable of producing asymmetries in power,
representation, and agency.

It is the doubled bow of solidarity and refusal that organizes the rest
of the book, as Giraud examines activist experiments with digital media
technologies (Chapter 2), protest camps and free food giveaways (Chapter
3), mainstream media discourses regarding antivivisection activism
(Chapter 4), as well as contemporary social media campaigns surrounding
laboratory beagles (Chapter 5). Whilst each of the chapters listed
contributes to the overall cohesiveness of Giraud\'s argument, Chapter 3
and 5 stand out as most aptly describing the quotidian practices of
exclusion. Chapter 3 is particularly impressive in its ability to bring
together three different examples---on critical animal studies, protest
camps, and food activism---to demonstrate the way in which
material-semiotic techniques of openness and pluralism prevent and
foreclose particular actions, expressions, and movements. For Giraud,
seemingly benevolent collective engagements, like food giveaways at
protest camps, can often bring forth latent inequalities and
hierarchical relations. In many ways this attests to the
unpredictability of action, allowing us to recognize complexity and to
move beyond arguments oriented around doing what is seemingly good and
just.

Chapter 5 pursues a similar argument, though it shifts away from notions
of openness, and instead considers charisma and its instrumental uses.
Focusing on social media campaigns surrounding the release of thirty
beagles from Green Hill (a breeding facility in Brescia, Italy), the
chapter examines the way that forms of nonhuman charisma, despite being
key to internet virality and collective mobilization, also reinstall
anthropocentric species hierarchies. Indeed, whilst the campaigns
succeeded in rallying support, they did so by favoring certain breeds
and species over others, linking the value of life to a range of
desirable qualities. It is worth noting that the convivial character of
the beagle, highlighted by activists, is paradoxically also the quality
that has made the breed easily exploitable for research purposes. Its
obedience is valued by both those attempting to "liberate" it and those
allegedly oppressing it.

Through Giraud\'s multi-issue case studies, activism is conceived of as
a constant negotiation between feel-good moments---of recruitment,
community participation, mobilization, sometimes inclusion---and those
that may be described as *killjoy* moments---of ambivalence, resistance,
and unevenness. Much like Sara Ahmed\'s concept of killing joy in order
to \"open a life, to make room for life, to make room for possibility,
for chance\" (2010, 20), an ethics of exclusion has the capacity to
encourage the emergence of new methods, approaches, and narratives.
Giraud concludes the book by erring away from essentialist
understandings of relation as either/or, taking us somewhere a little
bit more fraught and uncomfortable. She references Thom van Dooren\'s
(2016) work on Hawaiian crow conservation and the materialization of
crow, reflecting on elements of distancing and exclusion that push
seemingly cohesive assemblages into the realm of the uncanny. Giraud
concludes that relations are often brought into being through processes
that are mutually exclusive, rather than inclusive. Indeed, much like
multispecies flourishing, anti-capitalist and environmental mobilization
also rely upon necessary protocols, foreclosures, and frictions.

It is worth acknowledging that ethical decisions are animated by
historical forces, as much as they are by future desires. There is a
risk that Giraud\'s conceptual intervention in salvaging exclusion
obfuscates the harm done by entrenched structures and systems of
supremacy. It highlights the tension between projects seeking to
dismantle and those that believe in the repurposing of injurious
practices, institutions, and histories. At times, a deeper engagement is
lacking with issues of race, colonialism, and sexuality---despite
exclusions being a core tenet of hierarchized and dogmatic
classifications of who/what counts as human, citizen, or even being.
Additionally, it would have been welcome to see Giraud referencing the
extensive work of Indigenous and anti-colonial theorists on the issue of
generating decolonial futurities and relations through, and within,
brokenness. Works that could prove useful in this regard might include
Eve Tuck\'s "Suspending Damage" (2009) ---an open letter that calls on
researchers to reconsider the long-term impact of "damage-centered"
research---and Michelle Murphy\'s "Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical
Relations" (2017).

Whilst it is often easy to picture oneself as tangled up in an abundant
world of diverse multispecies relations, Giraud\'s book is ultimately a
reminder that the origin of the word *tangle* derives from *tagilen*,
meaning \"to involve in a difficult situation." In this way, the choice
to entangle also means an openness to the possibility of separation,
conflict, and refusal---reminding us of fraught histories, broken
alliances, and the enduring consequences of violence. Indeed, to invite
someone or something means that we might be responded to with a "no" or
"rather not." It is this exclusion that we have to recognize as an
essential component in our desire for connection, one that is the basis
of political power and will. With capitalist and imperialist projects
seeking absolute and unquestioned access---using relation to pillage and
extract ---it is becoming vital to support those who are unwilling to
cooperate. To radically reimagine the terms of our engagement. Alongside
asking \"what comes after entanglement," we might also ask \"what
won\'t?\"

### References

Ahmed, Sara. 2010. *The Promise of Happiness*. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.

Barad, Karen. 2007. *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and
the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.

Haraway, Donna. 2003. *The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People,
and Significant Otherness*. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press.

Kirksey, S. Eben, and Stefan Helmreich. 2010. "The Emergence of
Multispecies Ethnography." *Cultural Anthropology* 25 (4): 545--76.
[https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01069.x]{.underline}.

Murphy, Michelle. 2017. "Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations."
Cultural Anthropology 32 (4): 494--503.
[https://doi.org/10.14506/ca32.4.02]{.underline}.

Rose, Deborah Bird. 2013. "Val Plumwood\'s Philosophical Animism:
Attentive Interactions in the Sentient World." *Environmental
Humanities* 13 (1): 93--109. [https://doi.org/
10.1215/22011919-3611248]{.underline}.

Tuck, Eve. 2009. "Suspending Damage: A Letter to Communities." *Harvard
Educational Review* 79 (3): 409--28.
[https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.79.3.n0016675661t3n15]{.underline}.

Van Dooren, Thom. 2016. "Authentic Crows: Identity, Captivity and
Emergent Forms of Life." *Theory, Culture and Society* 33 (2): 29--52.
[https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276415571941]{.underline}.

### Author Bio

**Zsuzsanna Ihar** is a PhD student in the Department of History and
Philosophy of Science at the University of Cambridge. She writes about
scientific knowledge production across the agricultural, environmental,
and biological sciences. She is currently part of a Wellcome Trust
funded research project, charting historical perspectives on crop
diversity and food security (titled "From Collection to Cultivation").
Her dissertation examines the history and politics of militarised
agriculture, with a particular focus on crop revitalisation and seed
conservation.
