#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

## Book Review \| *Information Activism: A Queer History of Lesbian Media Technologies*, by Cait McKinney (Duke University Press, 2020)

Harris Kornstein

University of Arizona
hkornstein@arizona.edu

At a virtual event hosted by the ONE Archives in celebration of their
caringly provocative book *Information Activism: A Queer History of
Lesbian Media Technologies*, author Cait McKinney ended their
presentation with a photo of a lavender pencil embossed with the phrase
"lesbians invented the internet."^1^ Though McKinney was deliberate in
reminding the audience that this statement is not factually true (as
they also make clear throughout the book itself), this tongue-in-cheek
assertion cleverly signifies the book's intertwined intellectual,
methodological, and community-oriented contributions to studies of queer
information. Additionally, this pencil---created by McKinney's partner,
artist Hazel Meyer---playfully gestures toward not only the affective
and erotic relationships (in Lorde's sense) that underlie
lesbian-feminist organizing, but equally important, the material
practices like handwritten records and marginalia that structure these
archives themselves. As a contemporary object referencing historical
artifacts by artists and activists, the pencil further comments on
contemporaneous efforts to revive, recontextualize, and remediate
lesbian-feminist visual and material cultures via social media (a topic
McKinney references throughout the book and particularly in the
epilogue). Which is to say: there are many ways to read this excellent
book---as pre-history of the internet, as re-engagement with
lesbian-feminism activism, as an intervention into present-day digital
cultures, and beyond---but McKinney's strengths are in queerly refusing
neat conclusions.

Though lesbian feminists may not have literally invented the internet,
the information activism that McKinney theorizes compellingly counters
not only dominant narratives of computing history, but also resoundingly
rejects the concept of invention outright. McKinney meticulously
analyzes a number of activist networked and databased information
practices, demonstrating how these mundane and messy projects complicate
understandings of the internet as we know it. In challenging simplistic
notions of invention, McKinney's media archaeological work also
highlights divergent epistemological and applied approaches to many
ongoing digital predicaments, including access, privacy, labor,
maintenance, obsolescence, compression, searchability, user autonomy,
and information overload (to name but a handful). Still, McKinney's book
is not just an account of minor figures or multiple internets, but
functions as a call to rethink the role of information infrastructures
within social movements and the values that structure historic and
present technologies.

One of McKinney's key contributions in disrupting such invention
narratives is to introduce the titular concept of "information
activism," a community-based approach to documenting and distributing
difficult-to-come-by information via ever-evolving social techniques and
technologies. The book specifically traces the under-acknowledged
collective work of lesbian feminists in the United States and Canada,
beginning in the 1970s and extending through the present moment.
McKinney's conceptualization of information activism thus incorporates a
range of projects and platforms, including community archives,
newsletters, hotlines, bibliographic indexes, websites, and social
media. However, with such a capacious definition, it is easy to imagine
how other researchers in fields of information, media, communication,
and/or technology studies (and intersecting humanities and social
sciences) might apply information activism to other minoritized
communities or contexts. Indeed, while McKinney pays close attention to
both lesbian feminists' vernacular vocabularies and the specificities of
the disciplines just enumerated, their work also makes a
subtle-but-clear case for transdisciplinary approaches to researching
digital technologies.

In particular, McKinney highlights the often idealistic and imperfect
values that structure these different avenues of information activism
during historical periods in which there was virtually no media or
political representation for queer women. Such precarity necessitated
not only the development of content about diverse lesbian experiences
but also structures to store, organize, and disseminate such
information--- which McKinney smartly locates in projects like the
Lesbian Herstory Archives (LHA), the research newsletter *Matrices*, and
the Lesbian Switchboard. (Indeed, these projects' own formal and
informal archives, alongside interviews with their participants, provide
the basis of McKinney's research.) Much of this work was, and continues
to be, rooted in beliefs about lesbians having rights to both produce
and access information about community history and resources, across
generational, geographic, and other differences. For example, McKinney
highlights the pre-digital emergence of network metaphors in feminist
and gay/lesbian communities, noting their attention to shared learning
and labor through community archiving and publishing, as well as
distributed forms of care, fundraising, and resource sharing via print
newsletters. In chapters on indexing and archival projects, McKinney
examines commitments to access that prioritize making materials *usable*
by other lesbians rather than meeting arbitrary technical standards
(such as through a makeshift audio digitization setup), and categorize
materials using community-oriented language rather than the normative
terms adopted by larger institutions.

McKinney also documents deep commitments to values like transparency,
consent, and privacy in how decisions are made to preserve and digitize
materials, particularly given changing expectations around safety and
visibility over time. These commitments are especially apparent in the
ongoing work of the LHA, which maintains its own "archive of the
archives," and often informally documents many of its own historic
processes. McKinney notes a unique understanding of revision as feminist
method across several projects, rooted in intergenerational and futurist
orientations toward classifying information in ways that remain open as
terminologies, cultures, and politics change. Still, McKinney routinely
acknowledges the ways in which many information practices are hardly
systematic but instead emerge as improvisational responses to limited
resources (such as a volunteer joining with the time or skills to take
on a project) or dynamics like group conflict and personal burnout.
Relatedly, they pay careful attention to the challenges, compromises,
and failures of living up to such ideals, including historic breaches of
trust in how information is shared and with whom, as well as experiences
of harmful exclusion through essentialism or mis-classification,
particularly impacting women of color and trans people.

If McKinney's primary intervention is in theorizing information
activism, their other key contribution is in an engagement with legacies
of second-wave lesbian feminism through the lenses of queer, trans, and
anti-racist activism. While many scholars and activists seem to fall
into the trap of either romanticizing earlier feminist movements or
writing them off altogether, McKinney manages to find a middle ground
that simultaneously respects lesbian-feminist activists' real cultural
and political contributions, holds individuals and institutions
accountable for oppressive dynamics, and most significantly, explores
historic counterexamples of solidarity. Noting that lesbian feminists
were not monolithic in identity or ideology, McKinney argues that
despite numerous high-profile instances of trans-exclusionary rhetoric
and actions, many service-oriented projects like hotlines in fact often
served trans individuals in an everyday capacity. In the case of the
Lesbian Switchboard, for example, call logs suggest that many callers
may have been misgendered---though with evolving terminology and
non-standardized notation, it is often difficult to tell. Still,
McKinney cautiously embraces this ambiguity while also pointing to
evidence that several trans clients were indeed served by this project
via trans-specific resources collected by the organization. Similarly,
the LHA eventually established technical protocols to allow for revision
of participants' names in ways that, again, strive to reflect the
shifting identities and language used by individuals whose experiences
are documented. In responding to these cases and others, McKinney
engages feminist historiographic methods of speculation and direct
service to the LHA, to address these gaps in minoritarian archives and
gain greater insight into the relationships and processes that structure
them. As they note, these forms of engagement are uniquely important in
studying print cultures, which are limited in their abilities to capture
affective entanglements across diverse constituencies. Such fleeting
counterexamples may still leave much to be desired, but as McKinney
notes, they further situate lesbian-feminist information activism as a
process of tension, ambivalence, and continued becoming, rather than a
moment of invention or conclusion.

As such, McKinney's *Information Activism* reinforces why information
activism matters: that, when carefully attended to as part of social
movements, information and communication practices are not merely
discursive but profoundly material. That is, the information activism
practiced by lesbian feminists has helped to establish embodied
relationships, negotiate shared values, develop political positions,
provide direct forms of care, connect individuals to material resources,
and engage other important tactics that are central to, not separate
from, movement organizing. There is a contemporary urgency to McKinney's
work as well, particularly for students and scholars of today's social
movements and social media---especially many of my students who seem
preoccupied by slogans like "representation matters" or alleged
dichotomies between materialist and performative activism. Put simply,
McKinney's analysis of lesbian-feminist activism offers one example of
the ways in which attention to media and information may be part of
broader movements, with the understanding that such practices are often
challenging, labor-intensive, and hardly glamorous. In their epilogue,
McKinney directly addresses connections between earlier efforts and many
contemporary intersectional queer, trans, and feminist digital
practices, noting subtle differences between present activism and more
superficial and nostalgic attempts to engage this history. Ultimately,
however, McKinney's work does not feel wholly bound to either the past
or present. Like many meaningful queer projects, it is oriented toward a
sense of futurity: a perpetual process of improvisation, revision, and
worldmaking.

### Note

^1^ The book launch event, "Queer Archives, Queer Terrains," held on
October 18, 2020, via Zoom, featured McKinney discussing *Information
Activism* alongside Jen Jack Gieseking discussing his book *A Queer New
York: Geographies of Lesbians, Dykes, and Queers* (NYU Press, 2020),
with commentary by Karen Tongson. A video can be found here:
[https://one.usc.edu/program/queer-archives-queer-terrains]{.underline}.

### Author Bio

**Harris Kornstein** is an assistant professor of Public and Applied
Humanities at the University of Arizona whose research and art practice
focus on digital culture, surveillance, data and algorithms, media
art/activism, and queer/trans theory. Harris served as the *Catalyst*
managing editor for several summers.
