#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.6436111111111111in"}

## 

## Book Review \| *Dear Science and Other Stories*, by Katherine McKittrick (Duke University Press, 2021)

Chanda Prescod-Weinstein

University of New Hampshire

chanda.prescod-weinstein@unh.edu

### 

In *Dear Science and Other Stories,* Katherine McKittrick tells a
recursive tale of Black thought, Black life, Black loss, Black triumph,
Black brilliance, Black love, and yes, hallelujah, Black science. By
drawing together ideas from geography, Black feminist thought,
literature, computer science, feminist technoscience, and philosophy of
science, McKittrick maps out an ecosystem that understands Black thought
and creativity as Black liberation. The book succeeds as a major
contribution to these fields and points to a needed overlap between
them. In other words, *Dear Science* is an ambitious, significant text
with deep roots.

To read *Dear Science* is to be caught up in its own recurring algorithm
of what McKittrick calls "black livingness" (3). Black livingness,
McKittrick argues, is contained in how we---Black people---tell stories
about our universe, and importantly, our selves are always contained in
that universe. To define the phrase beyond that is to risk
oversimplification: the entire book is a simultaneous definition and
noticing of Black livingness. In the final pages, McKittrick does hint
at the conclusion we are meant to come to, which is that "black
rebellion, the work of liberation, regardless of scale, is livingness"
(186).

It has now been a year since I first read the book, and every text I
have picked up since reading this book has been read through the prism
of McKittrick's words. In this sense, *Dear Science* is an enormously
successful, lengthy refrain. Because the work drew my attention to the
"affective-physiological-corporeal-intellectual labor" (3) of
Black/intellectual life, I was called to read myself and my work through
the text---and indeed all Black creative work that I have since engaged
with in any serious way.

*Dear Science* functions as an important intervention in a moment where
there are extensive and at times vitriolic debates about defining
"Blackness," "Black life," and the very idea of whether there is such a
thing as Black living(ness). Rather than choosing a side in the debates,
for example, about Afropessimism vs. its critics, McKittrick chooses to
comprehensively notice "the physiological work of black liberation" (3).
The lingering question, of course, is what counts as Black liberation
work.

And it is here that *Dear Science* takes a strong position, answering
this question affirmatively and analytically, rather than through the
lens of what is not Black liberation. Black liberation is co-produced by
intellectual work that loves on Black people, that notices our *bios*
and *mythoi*, which as the Jamaican philosopher and novelist Sylvia
Wynter articulated them, are our matter and meaning. That is to say, the
physicality and creativity of Black livingness.

Those who are familiar with McKittrick's work as a Black feminist
geographer will not be surprised to hear that to read her is to read the
world through the lens of her reading of Wynter. Their seven-year
exchange, which appears in *Sylvia Wynter: On Being Human as Praxis*,
specifically the chapter "Unparalleled Catastrophe for Our Species? Or,
to Give Humanness a Different Future: Conversations," echoes throughout
*Dear Science*, including in its fundamental discursive framing around
"science" itself. In a footnote, McKittrick explains that her reading of
science is through the idea of scientia. In my view as a practicing
scientist, this is a reading of science's roots back into science: a
challenge to the scientific establishment to develop a firmly
established commitment to rational knowledge production. One might argue
that science as an institution has already made this commitment, but the
fact that one must continuously make the case for how Black thought is
scientific thought suggests otherwise. Black stories of Black livingness
articulate bios and mythoi, and the fact of Black positionality in
humanity. In this way, *Dear Science* reads as an experiment with
Wynter's theory of *homo narrans*. By noticing Black "corporeal and
affective labor," our understanding of the entire species is
illuminated.

Simultaneously, by orienting around this word, this institutional
structure that has so much power, McKittrick channels Wynter's refusal
to be disciplined into categories that are not constructed with Black
flourishing in mind, quipping that "Discipline is empire" (36). As
McKittrick notes in her January 2019 letter that begins "Dear Science,"
at the end of *Dear Science*, "To be black is to recognize and enervate
the fictive perimeters of you, Science" (186). Black liberation work is
disruptive to disciplining, to disciplines. Black livingness is both
made possible by Black resistance and it is also transcendent, made
possible, recursively, by its own undeniability. Here again we see
McKittrick experimenting with what it means to apply Wynter's ideas: to
revise how we read ourselves and each other through a broad conception
of science.

A complete mapping of Black livingness, particularly in relation to
science, requires excavating how science has aided and abetted in the
construction of Blackness. McKittrick attends to this in "(Zong) Bad
Made Measure," a deep dive into scientific racism, race science, and how
Black studies exists in part as a refutation of scientific racism but
also sometimes reifies one of scientific racism's core principles, that
race is biological nature. The story told in this chapter addresses "the
social production of biologically determinist racial scripts" and how
they "can be dislodged" by a confrontation with Black livingness and
Black labor (125).

Continuing her own discursive confrontation with the constraints of a
white-dominant academy, McKittrick does not write only in paragraphs
that span the page's margins. In "(Zong) Bad Made Measure," she also
writes in parallel columns, giving us the option of reading horizontally
or vertically, a topography on the page that evokes a multitude of
distinct experiences, all of them required to get at the completeness of
the story.

The word *Zong* itself references a grotesque eighteenth-century
incident where the Europeans crewing the ship *Zong* drowned over one
hundred kidnapped Africans because it led to more profit than letting
their captives live. The word also now has a secondary invocation for
those familiar with Black (Canadian) literature: poet M. NourbeSe
Philip's book-length poem, *Zong!* Thus, its invocation functions as
both a reference, yes, to Black death, but also to Black storytelling
and Black livingness through poetry.

This portion of the book is preceded by a playlist compiled by
McKittrick and fellow Black intellectuals. The list of songs acts as a
buffer between the analysis in "(Zong) Bad Made Measure" of the theory
that underpins scientific racism and race discourse and the chapter that
precedes the list, "Failure (My Head Was Full of Misty Fumes of Doubt)."
"Failure" is about the digitization of racism and its production of
Black death and suffering, or what Safiya Umoja Noble (2018) has called
*algorithms of oppression*. McKittrick outlines her attempts to write
her own algorithm, with the understanding that "algorithms are
future-making mathematical equations" and "our methodologies are, in
themselves, forms of black well-being?" (116). Again, McKittrick is
unpacking what Black liberation possibilities look like. Rather than
rejecting algorithms, she considers what Afrofuturist possibilities can
be imagined with and articulated through them.

McKittrick ultimately expresses a sense of failure because, after trying
to teach herself the fundamental tools of algorithmic
work---specifically, how to write computer code---she finds herself
unable to take up the necessary tools. When I interviewed her about
*Dear Science* for *Public Books*, I suggested that collaboration is
essential for Black liberation (Prescod-Weinstein 2021b). I wondered
whether, if McKittrick had tried to develop the algorithm with a Black
scientist, the outcome might have been different.

There is a way in which this letter at the end feels as if it was
directly written to me, the lone Black woman particle physics theory
professor living in a world that cannot imagine me, one in which I must
conjure myself daily. Perhaps it is seeking collaboration. My own book
*The Disordered Cosmos* is certainly prefigured in her note that "reader
wrote of future pathways...quarks and curved space" (2021a, 187),
because indeed that is what my book is about. My suspicion is that part
of the richness of *Dear Science* is exactly that so many Black thinkers
and makers will find that they have an intimate connection with the
book. Here is a book in which we are imagined, theorized, and brought to
life.

Each exquisite sentence of *Dear Science* is comprised of layers of
meaning. Still, McKittrick thought carefully about the importance of
readability and how the physicality of the book would be experienced,
complete with pages for notes at the back of the book. I appreciated the
deliberate decision to eschew endnotes in favor of footnotes that could
be read in tandem with the text. Though sometimes the footnotes are
physically disruptive to the page, it produces a book that is easier to
navigate than ones with endnotes often are. There is also an aesthetic
to the book, which is printed on glossy paper and midway through
contains a curated exhibit of artistic photography. On each page of
*Dear Science*, readers will find a reminder that Black (livingness) is
beautiful, complex, and brilliant.

### References

McKittrick, Katherine. 2015. *Sylvia Wynter: On Being Human as Praxis*.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.Â 

Noble, Safiya Umoja. 2018. *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines
Reinforce Racism*. New York: New York University Press.Â 

Prescod-Weinstein, Chanda. 2021a. *The Disordered Cosmos: A Journey into
Dark Matter, Spacetime, and Dreams Deferred*. New York: Bold Type Books.

---------. 2021b. "Public Thinker: Katherine McKittrick on Black
Methodologies and Other Ways of Being." *Public Books*, February 1,
2021.
<https://www.publicbooks.org/public-thinker-katherine-mckittrick-on-black-methodologies-and-other-ways-of-being/>.Â 

### Author Bio

**Dr. Chanda Prescod-Weinstein** is an assistant professor of physics
and astronomy and core faculty in women's and gender studies at the
University of New Hampshire. She is the author of *The Disordered
Cosmos: A Journey into Dark Matter, Spacetime, and Dreams Deferred*.
