#  ![](media/image1.png){width="2.25in" height="0.64375in"}

## 

## Book Review \| *Affinity Online: How Connection and Shared Interest Fuel Learning*, by Mizuko Ito, Crystle Martin, Rachel Cody Pfister, Matthew H. Rafalow, Katie Salen, and Amanda Wortman (New York University Press, 2019)

Aron Rosenberg

McGill University

aron.rosenberg@mail.mcgill.ca

### Abstract

Schools have been slow to respond to the growing importance of digital
communities in many students' lives. Ito et al. investigate how
educators might connect diverse students' digital experiences to
curricular, civic, or career-related aims in equitable ways. *Affinity
Online: How Connection and Shared Interest Fuel Learning* explores the
value of online communities or affinity networks---spaces on the
internet where like-minded users can gather to connect with one another
and develop their shared interests. Online affinity networks "provide
opportunities that are self-selected and intentional, and that are also
tied to contributions to social communities and authentic recognition in
these communities" (17). Ito et al. believe that these connections and
the accompanying recognition provide opportunities for learning that are
more meaningful than "much of the learning that young people encounter
in school" (17). The cases featured in the book include examples of
online affinity networks where users gather digitally to learn about
fanfiction, crafting, online gaming, sports, anime, vlogging, and dance.

The investigations of these cases aim to support educators, parents, and
researchers concerned with how education can be improved by
internet-related technologies, specifically the kinds of online
communities described in the book. The authors discuss this as
*connected learning* and use the term for their goal of "realizing a
world where all young people are able to fully engage in learning and
opportunities tied to \[i.e. *connected* to\] their interests and
passions" (4). Connected learning holds that "learning is resilient and
meaningful when it is tied to social relationships and cultural
identities, and when it spans in-school and out-of-school settings" (3).
The cases explored in this book capture instances of connected learning
with online affinity networks that the authors identify as effective,
positive, and representing a diverse group of internet users. They
investigate these cases through a combination of "critical ethnography,
survey research, and design research" (10). Nonetheless, the book's
discussion is oriented more towards "design and advocacy than
traditional scholarly social scientific discourse" (10). This approach
limits the authors' attempts to critically assess connected learning,
for instance by failing to meaningfully engage with how marginalized
internet users' identities may relate to their experience accessing and
seeking recognition in online affinity networks.

*Affinity Online* frames its discussion as addressing diverse youth
populations' experiences of the internet in ways that reflect a wide
variety of interests. By "diverse," the authors are referring to their
inclusion of both "the dominant culture of digital elites" (15) as well
as "youth historically underrepresented in online affinity networks"
(15)---"specifically girls and black and Latino youth" (15). Even with a
diverse range of cases though, the book's discussion fails to unpack
issues it introduces---like the inequitable access different populations
have to the internet, or the ways that discrimination may differently
impact marginalized users. Instead, the text generically notes
problematic dynamics in these networks---for example, "bad behavior,
trolling,...unproductive forms of criticism and feedback...\[and\]
'griefing,' which is when players destroy each other's creations or
steal from one another" (180)---and glosses over them by suggesting that
"communities with positive learning dynamics all have norms and
mechanisms to guard against" (180) these unruly ways of participating.
The authors claim that the problem is not about the technologies and the
internet itself but "the specific social, cultural, and institutional
contexts of their uptake" (5). Further scholarly and community work is
needed, therefore, to unpack both the problematic potential opened by
digital technologies and how to navigate the related contexts in which
they are used.

In *Affinity Online*'s first chapter, authors introduce the value of
online affinity networks and give context for the cases investigated
throughout the book. The cases included are used to promote existing
instances of connected learning---involving online affinity
networks---that the authors believe "can be spread and scaled to address
systemic problems" (14). In this first chapter, authors introduce
readers to a community of wrestling fans and to *StarCraft II* gamers.
The members profiled in these cases are from diverse racial backgrounds,
but their races are mentioned without an analysis of whether or how
their racial identities intersect with users' involvement in online
affinity networks.

Chapter 2 discusses "the infrastructure, culture, and practices that
hold online affinity networks together" (40). It mentions several types
of diverse populations that may participate in these groups: "ethnic,
religious, or LGBTQ" (40), "children and youth who have limited
mobility" (41). Though it does mention problems that may arise in online
networks---environments that are "exclusionary and unforgiving" (44) or
that foster "a negative form of extremism" (44)---it does not explore
how to best support minority communities in these spaces. Rather,
authors claim that they can best show readers how to avoid these risks
by focusing instead on networks that are not struggling with these
issues: "prosocial and learning-oriented online affinity networks"
(44--45). This chapter focuses on two online affinity networks---one
that allows people to share fanfiction about the British boyband One
Direction, and a second about Bollywood dance competitions on college
campuses in the United States. This second case is the only point in
*Affinity Online* where the race or national background of people
profiled is explicitly explored. Members of this affinity group
identified ethnic and cultural connections as a benefit they appreciated
about their involvement in the online Bollywood dance competition
network.

In Chapter 3, authors uncover how online affinity groups relate to
cultural or "subcultural" capital. They explore "how community norms,
reputation, and status are negotiated and the implications for learning"
(83). The discussion suggests that members of these online networks
"develop their own norms, status hierarchies, and boundary-making
processes" (86) that often become exclusionary (87). Again, instead of
addressing how diverse users might navigate exclusionary group dynamics,
the book "sought out networks that do not have overtly exclusionary
values" (87), and avoids getting into analyses of the more subtle forms
of discrimination and prejudice that it mentions---like the importance
of 'good' grammar in certain affinity communities (95). Towards the end
of this chapter, the authors explicitly mention that sexist dynamics
pervade many online communities, even in the cases that this book
"actively sought out" (100) for their inclusivity. The authors concede
that "it takes more than good intentions and a handful of positive
exceptions to transform pervasive cultural hierarchies and social
exclusions" (100). However, *Affinity Online* belies this conclusion by
relying almost exclusively on highlighting the positive exceptions to
exclusionary online networks. The authors, though, do provide one
strategy that online affinity groups can try to promote more
inclusivity; "provid\[ing\] structures that teach subcultural capital to
newcomers" (100) can remove some of the barriers to entering these
communities. The cases chosen in this book strive for such a model,
especially the two discussed in this chapter: one around mentoring
players of a video game called *LittleBigPlanet 2,* and a second about
sharing anime music videos, as well as feedback and techniques for
making them.

Chapter 4 outlines "how learning in online affinity networks can connect
to pathways that lead to...academic, career, and civic opportunity"
(125). This chapter mentions that lacking a connection between one's
identity and learning can be a barrier to development; it suggests that
students from non-dominant cultures can be particularly harmed by
schooling that is not connected to them in personalized ways. Authors
discuss online affinity networks as providing that necessary connection
"between the classroom and the wider world" (126). This chapter does not
address the question of how non-dominant cultures relate to online
affinity networks, except for the continued labeling of people's racial
backgrounds. There is a section in this chapter about "civic engagement"
(136) that discusses a Bollywood dance performance that empowered gay
members of a traditionally conservative community. This anecdote,
however, relates to an in-person incident, not an online interaction.
Though this section falls short of addressing how online communities can
support marginalized users of these networks, the two cases focused on
in this chapter---a Harry Potter-themed knitting community and a
community following the Nerdfighters YouTube video blog---do uncover how
affinity networks on the internet can contribute to charitable actions
offline.

The final chapter in the book uses the ideas and cases explored to
summarize how contemporary educational opportunities might work towards
connected learning. The authors suggest that for connected learning to
be achieved effectively, educators and parents need to "more explicitly,
intentionally, and actively" (165) connect education with young people's
interests on the internet. However, realizing the authors' dream future
where *all* young people are able to connect their learning to their
digital interests will require more work and research into the critical
issues marginalized users face in relation to online affinity networks.
Practitioners, parents, and researchers must ground strategies for
connected learning in further investigations of how diverse internet
users may be differently able to access online groups and be recognized
or validated within them. Ito et al. describe and analyze a wide sample
of online affinity networks in ways that can support their
inclusion---and the exploration of other similar digital spaces---in
meaningful educational experiences for more students. These studies
build a foundation from which to address their true concern of "better
and more equitable educational futures" (6) for everyone.

### Author Bio

**Aron Rosenberg** is a high school teacher and graduate student. He is
studying how young people's experiences with digital technologies
connect them to issues of social and environmental justice. Aron spent
2020 offline.
